---
layout: post
title: 'Winter Bash 2014&mdash;Stack Overflow Blog'
tags: blogoverflow
---

[Originally published on Blog Overflow.](https://stackoverflow.blog/2014/12/15/winter-bash-2014/)

> There is no better antidote, at least for the worst hours and eclipses of the soul, than to conjure up...serious frivolity.&mdash;[Friedrich Nietzsche](https://books.google.com/books?id=Nl-vaAdJD3MC&pg=PA61&lpg=PA61#v=onepage&q&f=false)



<a href="http://winterbash2014.stackexchange.com/"><img src="/images/urxgC.png" alt="Winter Bash 2014"/></a>



## What's Winter Bash again?


No, it's not a new flavor of [Unix
shell](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bash_(Unix_shell)). Rather, Winter
Bash is an [ancient
tradition](http://stackexchange.com/promos/2/hat-dash) of Stack
Exchange. (2011 is ancient according to Internet time.) Here's how it
works:


1. Starting right now, when you complete one of [30-odd
   challenges](http://winterbash2014.stackexchange.com/) while logged
   on a [participating
   site](http://winterbash2014.stackexchange.com/leaderboard), you
   will be awarded the associated hat. To notify you, an icon will
   light up on the top bar. In addition, admire your hat collection on
   the [Winter Bash 2014
   site](http://winterbash2014.stackexchange.com/). Finally, your
   profile includes the number of unique snowflakes **hats** (<img
   src="/images/VmGTG.png"
   alt="You have a hat to wear!"/>) you've earned all around the
   network.
2. Once you acquire an item, click your avatar to pick a hat that you
   earnedâ€“not just on the current site, but anywhere. When you are
   satisfied the hat's position, click "Wear hat" and it will be
   visible everywhere your avatar is displayed. Optionally, you may
   have a different look on each site. Once you are wearing a hat,
   you'll also see an option to go unadorned. (But really, why would
   you want that?)

   <a href="http://meta.stackexchange.com/users/1438/jon-ericson"><img src="/images/8FDy0.png" alt="I'm a pirate!"/></a>


3. On January 4, 2015 at 23:59:59 UTC, all hats will be returned to
   the Stack Exchange vault. The best way to preserve holiday memories
   is to [take plenty of pictures](http://www.take-a-screenshot.org/)
   before they are gone.</li>

## Again with the hats? What happened to "We hate fun"?


In the face of the darkening days of winter, we put aside our [steely,
businesslike
frowns](http://blog.stackoverflow.com/2010/01/stack-overflow-where-we-hate-fun/)
to wear [virtual cosmetic
items](https://wiki.teamfortress.com/wiki/Cosmetic_items). It's our
solemn duty to cut out the nonsense leaving pure, unadulterated
knowledge as permanent artifacts helpful to future visitors. And that
task is no laughing matter.


Yet, to quote
[G. K. Chesterton](http://www.ccel.org/ccel/chesterton/heretics.xvi.html):


> About what other subjects can one make jokes except serious
> subjects?

The truth is, we don't really hate fun. Contributing to a volunteer
effort should be an enjoyable experience. Heck, [fake internet
points](http://blog.stackoverflow.com/2013/09/five-years-ago-stack-overflow-launched-then-a-miracle-occurred/)
are integral to how these sites operate. Winter Bash reminds us that
there's more to life than nose-to-the-grindstone work and quality
content. We don't stop having fun when the event ends. We go back to
having fun with a larger purpose.



## Is everything going to be the same as last year?


Management gave us a clear mandate when it came to building new
features into Winter Bash:

> We were not allowed to spend weeks on snow animation.

Thankfully, we could reuse last year's start-of-the-art snowfall
algorithm for the [official Winter Bash 2014
homepage](http://winterbash2014.stackexchange.com/). There you can
discover a nearly[^1] complete list of hats and how you can earn
them. The activities this year are mostly fresh and (hopefully) all
fun. If you could go ahead and answer 5 questions on Saturday, that'd
be great. Mmmkay?


Once again, we are delighted with the work of freelance illustrator,
[Elias Stein](http://www.eliasstein.com/). It's difficult to express
how satisfying it feels to think up a concept (Tam o' Shanter!) and
have it manifest a few days later:


<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tam_o%27_Shanter_%28cap%29"><img src="/images/hdKRn.png" alt="Tam o' Shanter"/></a>


In the past, some people have had trouble getting hats to fit
properly. [Last
year](http://blog.stackoverflow.com/2013/12/winter-bash-2013-is-here/),
we added the ability to reposition hats, but that did little to
satisfy folks with especially large or disembodied heads. So, this
year [hats can be resized and twisted to fit your
head](http://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/212056/all-i-want-is-a-well-fitted-hat). (Thanks,
[balpha](http://balpha.de/about/)!)


<a href="http://meta.stackexchange.com/users/811/shog9"><img src="/images/9lMdh.png" alt="Shog The Hunter"/></a>


If you have any questions about the event, try the [Frequently Asked
Questions.](http://winterbash2014.stackexchange.com/faq) If your
question isn't covered there, please ask it on [Meta Stack
Exchange](http://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/tagged/winterbash-2014),
our Q&A; site about our network of Q&A; sites.


Before signing off, I apologize to our [Southern Hemisphere
friends](http://meta.pt.stackoverflow.com/questions/2288/o-que-voc%C3%AAs-t%C3%AAm-na-cabe%C3%A7a)
for the name. I wanted to go with something season-neutral like HAT
ATTACK or December Fling, but tradition ruled the day. Just remember:
while you are sipping refreshing drinks and enjoying the sunshine,
it's [cold](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tuCO7Kq744U), wet, and
dark up here.


**Act now and get [an exclusive hat only available
today](http://winterbash2014.stackexchange.com/saint-lucia)!**

 ---
 
[^1]: This is <a
    href="http://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/212799/how-do-i-get-the-winterbash-2013-secret-hats"><img
    src="/images/BRAuT.png"
    alt="status-bydesign"/></a>.


			
