---
layout: post
title: The Puppet Race
subtitle: Asking a question and getting comments
tags: community race_to_1k
comments: true
---

When writing
[this series](http://jericson.github.io/2017/07/26/race_to_1k_1.html)
I considered why year after year our developer surveys show
[less than 10% of Stack Overflow users are female](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey/2018#developer-profile-gender). As
a user, employee and (ex-)programmer, this makes me sad and I wish we
could fix it. I've [pondered the problem](/2015/04/22/cs_females.html)
on these pages in the past. I don't know that I arrived at any sort of
conclusion except that we probably need to think less about star
programmers and more about exceptional programming teams. I'd sorta
hoped that putting myself in a woman's shoes would give me insight
into the barriers they might have using the site.

Between answering questions and
[writing Documentation](/2017/12/08/race_to_1k_5.html), I accumulated
170 reputation by the 9<sup>th</sup> day of the experiement. I'd also
started receiving comments. This was important because I'd been hoping
to find a smoking gun of sexism. Overtly sexist comments tend to be
flagged and deleted fairly quickly on Stack Overflow, but subtly
sexist ones often remain. The first two comments were decidedly
non-traumatic:

> Yes i was solving that problem. I remembered that there was a
> relation between that and Pascal's' triangle and I ended up devising
> aO(n^2) solution, thank
> God!&mdash;[Thalatta](http://stackoverflow.com/users/2276081/thalatta)
> [May 4 at 23:15](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/43770480/stack-level-too-deep-systemstackerror-when-recursing/43773551?noredirect=1#comment74628963_43773551)

> Thanks a lot for the advice. This helped a
> lot. :)&mdash;[Joseph Bourne](http://stackoverflow.com/users/5284687/joseph-bourne)
> [May 8 '17 at 17:20](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43835444/obtaining-repository-name-using-octokit-ruby-toolkit-for-github-api/43853251?noredirect=1#comment74742933_43853251)

In other words, the comments I got were from grateful askers whose
problems I was able to solve. It occurred to me that I might see
different results if I asked a question. I was having a great time
learning Ruby and didn't have any questions that weren't immediately
solved by searching the internet or reading the
documentation. However, I'd written an example of tail recursion and
was getting annoyed that Ruby didn't have a method of tracing the
values of variables as they were changed without using an interactive
debugger. So I asked
[a question about printing this information](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/43877146/is-there-an-equivalent-of-shell-scriptings-xtrace-option-for-ruby)
to put into a log file.

Sure enough, I got two comments that were less encouraging:

> “It's especially helpful to send the execution history to a log file
> so that you can debug problems that happened in the past.” If you
> did this in production as you suggest you'd have security issues and
> several MB of logs for every request. Check out
> [byebug](https://github.com/deivid-rodriguez/byebug) for debugging
> in dev, and [NewRelic](https://newrelic.com/application-monitoring)
> or [Honeybadger](https://www.honeybadger.io/) for handling
> exceptions in production.

> It's really good to get familiar with debuggers. They'll let you see
> EVERYTHING your code is doing, which helps avoid unexpected results
> (AKA "bugs"). Don't rely on outputting to a logger or a file; For a
> long-running job processing millions of lines of text you could end
> up spewing horrendous amounts of logging that you'd have to go
> through, so be very judicious if you go that route.

Now you need to understand that **both comments are technically useful
and provide good advice**. I did find that logging processes produced
prodigious log files that were mostly unhelpful. I also found on my
previous job that we accidentally created security holes when we
logged password values. Printing execution traces is a rudimentary
solution compared to Ruby's excellent interactive debuggers. Neither
comment made reference to my female-sounding name nor referenced
anything about my identity at all. And yet, I responded somewhat
defensively to both.[^1]

It took me some time to recognize that they bugged me because they
were so
[condescending](https://twitter.com/aprilwensel/status/974859164747931650). The
very reason I referenced log files was to demonstrate that my problem
was not a case of idle curiosity. I know what I'm asking for. I didn't
need to be told that tracing every line of execution would create
monster files. I _certainly_ didn't need a definition of "bugs". 

Beyond that, it can be frustrating when people quote part of my post
to make their point. Often it feels like being taken out of
context. In this case, it seems the commenter misunderstood that very
sentence. I was trying to convey that I knew what I was doing even if
it seems a little insane. The comment implied I didn't know what I was
doing. Ideally people would use
[active listening techniques](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_listening)
to ensure we understand each other. The links to debuggers are useful,
but also fail to address my question. As for using all-caps to
emphasize a word, is there anyone who does not find that ANNOYING?

And to top it off, I didn't get any answers. **If this were my only
interaction with Stack Overflow, I doubt I'd have contributed again.**
That first interaction with a community sets a tone that's very hard
to change. What's worse is that many people are predisposed to seeing
condescending comments on our site. Changing that perception will
require people consistently going out of their way to be welcoming.

So the question is: did this asker get these comments because of a
female-sounding name, lack of reputation or some other reason?  It's
impossible to know for certain, of course. But I do have a data point
that suggests it's not specifically sexist or disdain for new
users. You see, I get similar comments directed toward
[my high-reputation, clearly male profile](https://meta.stackexchange.com/users/1438/jon-ericson).

Before I explain my theory about why these comments exist, I'd like to
take a short detour a workshop Stack Overflow offered to employees. It
was called
["Unconscious Bias & Behaviors of Inclusion"](http://lifelabsnewyork.com/companies/workshops/)
and was facilitated by
[LifeLabs](http://lifelabsnewyork.com/about/). After taking it, I
wrote a mini-review for other people on the team who were scheduled
for later sessions:

> It feels weird to say it, but I felt like the session also helped me
> feel like I fit in because, like everyone else, I don't fit into
> groups all the time. I think we get used to the lines between us
> being drawn certain ways and that tends to put me in the ingroup as
> often as not. But the materials were set up to not emphasis those
> well-worn lines as much as I expected. It was kinda a relief to be
> honest.

One of the exercises we did was to think of a time when we were an
outsider. I thought of the day my twins had a play date at the park
after preschool. At one point, I realized the mothers (and I was the
only father there) were discussing breastfeeding. As you might
imagine, I quickly made my escape to help some children on the
swings. Nobody told me and I doubt anyone intended for it, but it was
obvious I didn't belong. With that incident in mind, I understood at
least some of the barriers women face in male-dominated environments.

At any rate, hyper-critical comments are not so much prompted by the
identity of the post author as they are by a Stack Overflow cultural
value. As Jon Skeet, our top user by reputation,
[recently put it](https://codeblog.jonskeet.uk/2018/03/17/stack-overflow-culture/):

> The goal of Stack Overflow is to create a repository of high-quality
> questions, and high-quality answers to those questions.

_Taken on it's own_ that goal is both noble and revolutionary. The
only reason you have heard of Stack Overflow is that it hits this mark
with regularity. What's more, all content is created by unpaid
volunteers who freely donate their highly-compensated time. And it all
happens because thousands of individual programmers believe in the
mission and find it rewarding to pursue. 

At its heart, "high-quality" follows
[Stewart's test](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_know_it_when_I_see_it):
"I know it when I see it". High-quality questions are especially
tricky to nail down. We've made a
[stab at an objective criteria](https://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/302970/how-is-question-quality-measured-in-a-b-tests)
that considers voting and whether the question has been answered. But
even that is open to debate since voting itself can be subjective. In
particular, some people don't see questions as individuals requesting
assistance, but as the grist for valuable answers many people might
find via Google. While it's polite to overlook an incidental problem
with a question someone asks in private, thinking about future readers
means even minor problems need to be warned about in a comment or
corrected in an edit.[^2]

For better or worse, Stack Exchange sites use an
[adversarial system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adversarial_system)
to arrive at the truth. It's not a prefect system by any means. For
me, I never am comfortable submitting a post. I always have a little
moment of terror when I press the publish button _even on
[the site where I'm a top user](https://hermeneutics.stackexchange.com/users?tab=Reputation&filter=all)_. **If
it's nerve-racking for people who are already used to participation,
how much more daunting is this system for people who feel like
outsiders?** This is _the problem_ we need to address if we hope to
have a user population that matches the demographics of programmers in
the workforce.

I sing in a choir and one of the other basses always wants to be
surrounded by other basses since he can't read music. He doesn't think
of himself as a good singer (he's wrong) and doesn't feel safe unless
he can hear his part all round him. We call it "a cocoon of
basses". In the same way,
[recent research](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/319244743_Someone_Like_Me_How_Does_Peer_Parity_Influence_Participation_of_Women_on_Stack_Overflow)[^3]
suggests women are more likely to become engaged on the site when they
see other women using it. That's just human nature and we need to do a
better job of providing safe spaces for people to be around others who
have the same struggles. I'm hoping
[Stack Overflow for Teams](https://stackoverflow.com/teams) will help
fill that gap.

And yet, I find the most joy when I'm singing in a choir next to
people singing other parts. When I can hear the altos, tenors and,
yes, even sopranos, I know that I really learned the bass part. I
believe women (and other underrepresented people) ought to have that
same feeling when they participate on Q&A. Stack Overflow will never
reach it's potential unless all sorts of programmers can feel equally
confident asking and answering questions while the world watches.

---

Footnotes:

[^1]: After some consideration, I deleted both my comments and, in my
    capacity as moderator, the other users' comments. It feels unfair
    for me to entrap users and shame them by using a made-up identity.

[^2]: Since I'd deleted warning comments on Kathryn's question, I
    decided to edit the question and answer to address some of the
    problems they called out.

[^3]: Denae Ford, the first author of that paper, also helped Kristina
    Lustig and Jeremy Banks set up an
    [experiment with mentoring on chat](https://meta.stackoverflow.com/questions/353845/stack-overflow-mentorship-research-project). That
    project was extremely successful, but had some scaling
    problems. I'd like to take another look at it soon.

<!--  LocalWords:  commenter Lustig
 -->
