---
layout: post
title: Sourdough and the art of tending a culture
comments: yes
tags: community
---

Originally [published on
Twitter](https://threadreaderapp.com/thread/1242203741517799425.html). I've
added a few images and footnotes. I expect this post will have a
sequel soonish.

---

I let my sourdough starter die several years ago because I just didn't
have the energy to bake. Last week I got the urge again and got a
starter going. My previous starter was from a family culture I brought
from Idaho, so I never started a culture myself. On day one, I mixed
equal weight water and flour into a jar. Since water is much denser,
that works out to roughly double the flour by volume. For simplicity,
I just use a half cup of flour and a quarter cup of water.[^1] Then I
waited. For my flour, I have some whole wheat flour that got lost in
my move. It's not rancid yet, but I wouldn't want to use it in
bread. Perfect for my starter though. The yeast and bacteria that make
up a sourdough culture don't care what my flour tastes like.

![](/images/sourdough_ingredients.jpg)

Nothing happened in the first 24 hours. Just a lump of dough to look
at. But at a microscopic level, the moisture is beginning to revive
yeast spores that are found in the air and in the flour. I put my
starter between the toaster and the oven to encourage them to
reproduce.[^2] Yeast consumes the sugars found in flour to product
carbon dioxide (useful for leavening) and alcohol. We use alcohol in
drinks, of course, but its primary function is as a
disinfectant. Brewing was an important discovery for civilization
because it provided germ-free hydration.  Alcohol in starters fends
off most other microbes. But it doesn't deter lactobacilli, which are
bacteria that convert sugars to lactic acid. They thrive in
environments with alcohol. Their waste product increases the acidity
of the starter and that wards off other microbes too.

![](/images/sourdough_mixing.jpg)

So yeast and lactobacilli work together to create an environment
hostile to almost everything else. In addition, the bacteria consume
mostly maltose, which is a sugar produced when starches in flour are
broken down by an enzyme called amylase.  Yeast, as it turns out,
produces amylase. It also consumes all the other sugars found in flour
such as glucose. Together the yeast and bacteria convert moistened
flour into carbon dioxide, alcohol and lactic acid. It's a symbiotic
relationship with one missing piece: a baker.  At some point sourdough
culture runs out of sugars and starches to digest. And the alcohol and
acid can even harm the culture which is especially comfortable
there. If allowed to go freely, the culture would consume itself and
the yeast would form spores to survive starvation.  Therefore on day
2, I added another equal parts (by weight) flour and water. This
allows the yeast and bacteria to thrive. I started to see bubbles of
CO2 rising to the top of the starter and making it less dense. This is
what I want out of the process.

![](/images/sourdough_growth.jpg)
 
On day 3 I made a batch of pancakes. They don't need much leavening
(and I added some baking powder to help out). I'll need to take out a
fair amount of starter regularly or it will get too large for my
jar. From now on, I'll need to feed it regularly. Hence pancakes.  The
first batch isn't terribly sour. It's mostly the bacteria that gives
sourdough its unique flavor. Typically it takes a week after reviving
a starter to get a stable culture. At the moment, it smells and looks
kinda gross before I feed it. The balance isn't right yet.  My
pancakes were on the boring side. (We ran out of milk yesterday and
nobody has wanted to go to the store for more.) But in a few days I'll
be ready to bake bread. That's the ultimate goal, of course. That and
waffles, pretzels, English muffins, dinner rolls, etc. and so on.

![](/images/sourdough_pancakes.jpg)

I used the word "culture" a few times in this thread because that's
the technical term for what a sourdough starter is. It's a mix of
organisms growing together. But we usually think of culture in human
terms. It's the medium in which groups thrive.  Successful human
cultures are symbiotic. The interdependencies are far more complex
than the symbiosis between yeast and bacteria feeding on wheat flour
and water. Think of the complex culture required to produce a TV show,
for instance, and multiply that by everything we make.  On the one
side there's an industry full of specialized workers producing 20 to
60 minute sequences of images and sound. On the other are thousands
and millions of people with similar cultivated preferences. And in the
middle are curators and distribution channels.  If we want more of the
the product (TV shows) we need to have a stable environment so that
some people will spend the time needed to be really good at, say,
making sound effects. It's no good learning to do that if the market
for that skill dries up.  I'm convinced, by the way, that California
has thrived as an entertainment center because it has generous
unemployment benefits. When a show ends its run, everyone has a stable
source of income while they look for a new gig. It's not the only
possible solution,[^3] but it works.

![](/images/sourdough_boule.jpg)

All this brings me to online community management and a mistake I've
seen far too many times: misinterpreting hostility. The easiest way to
think of snark, rude comments, grumpiness and so on is that some
people are just mean and we should get rid of them.  Now to be clear,
some people _are_ mean and we should get rid of them. But that group
of people tend to be a small percentage of even unhealthy
communities. We call these people trolls and they exist to cause
problems. Most of the time they go way beyond the occasional snark.
Think back to the yeast and bacteria in sourdough. They produce an
environment hostile to other microbes as a natural byproduct of
digesting sugars. It's not because they are being mean; it's just what
they do. Acid and alcohol build up if there's not enough sugar for
growth.

![](/images/sourdough_loaf.jpg)

Same thing with communities. People are drawn to a group because they
can do things there. It might be to answer questions on Stack Exchange
or to find out what SAT scores and GPA are needed to get into a
specific school on College Confidential.  In some cases people come to
a community once or twice and leave. That's a bit like the flour I add
to my starter. In other cases, people don't leave. They are committed
to the community itself. Remembering they are instrumental in this
analogy, they are like yeast and bacteria.  It's easy to dislike the
flavor of a community and blame the part of the community that puts a
sour taste in your mouth. "I wish all those lactobacilli would just
find some other place to go. Why do we allow lactic acid anyway?"
It's a straight line from identifying the problem, spotting the cause
and formulating a solution. It's also a big mistake. If there's a
functional community, it's likely each part (other than the trolls)
serve a useful purpose. Perhaps lactic acid protects the culture
somehow?

![](/images/sourdough_slice.jpg)

---

Footnotes:

[^1]: I used [The Clever Carrot's sourdough starter
    recipe](https://www.theclevercarrot.com/2019/03/beginner-sourdough-starter-recipe/). In
    the past, I've use [Nancy Silverton's feeding
    plan](https://www.food.com/recipe/nancy-silverton-s-grape-sourdough-starter-316306)
    which uses equal volume. That produces a much more liquid starter,
    obviously. I'm not sure which I will like better, but [according
    to Modernist
    Cuisine](https://modernistcuisine.com/2018/09/sourdough-science/)
    a more liquid starter is more sour.

[^2]: The microbes, not the appliances.

[^3]: There's also [a
    union](https://sound.stackexchange.com/questions/849/how-important-is-union-membership-for-sound-designers-and-production-sound-mixer),
    which is the traditional way for people skilled at a particular
    craft to preserve that knowledge.
