---
layout: post
title: Star Realms' leveling system
tags: game design discourse
comments: true
---

I've been playing kinda a lot of a game called [Star
Realms](https://boardgames.stackexchange.com/questions/50856/does-it-matter-what-faction-mech-world-is). It
has an app and I've played over 600 games against other humans online
plus several hundred more against the AI. My lifetime record against
people is 44%, which means I lose 3 times for every 2 times I win:

![My Star Realms profile](/images/star_realms_profile.png)

But this week, my record was substantially better: 62%. Why? It's
possible I'm extraordinarily lucky this week, but there's a big thing
I changed. There are two different ways to play against other players:

1. 48 hours per turn
2. Realtime

The first is like playing chess by email. You have plenty of time to
consider your moves (and so does your opponent). Most of the time I
take far fewer than 48 hour and sometimes I actually see the other
player make their move immediately after I end my turn. This is one of
my favorite ways to play because there's no particular pressure to
play my turn. I typically have a half dozen games going at a time this
way.

But starting this week, I tried playing Realtime games, which limit
players to a minute or so per turn. It works a bit like a chess clock
except you get a few seconds added when you make each move in your
turn. The game doesn't split out my win/loss record by game type, but
it quickly became obvious I win more games in the faster format.

It could be I'm better at the live game. It requires a level of
concentration and quick thinking that the play-by-mail version doesn't
demand. My attention is also divided between several games and all the
other things going on in my life. It's easier to get more games
in so, in theory, I have a chance to learn from mistakes more rapidly.

But there's another factor that probably matters more: the realtime
mode seems to have more players. I can't find reliable statistics for
how many people play each mode, but my impression is that PBM has more
rematches with players I've recently played. More to the point, my
recent matches have been with players ranging from level 1
to 27. Meanwhile, my realtime games have been with players at, just
above or just below my level.

As a result, my 48-hour games tend to be blow outs since either I'm
far advanced compared to the other player or the other way around. My
live games have been much more competitive. Surprisingly I'm also
winning more games against people at my level. I think the reason is
that I'm a better player than the level system indicates. Partially it
helps I've played games against far better players and (hopefully)
learned a few things.

I suspect the level system combined with the nature of the game itself
means playing against varied competition dramatically slows
leveling. Top players win [65% of their
games](https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/1820377/article/26512475#26512475),
so there's considerable luck in Star Realms. Sometimes the cards turn
against you and it's hard to win. Meanwhile the level system counts
loses against wins. To go from level 9 to level 10, you need to win 10
more games than you lose. While I can beat up on low level players,
losing against better players halts my progress.

Whatever the cause, I enjoy games against people with roughly my level
of skill. Of course I also enjoyed playing against random competition
too as indicated by hundreds of 48-hour games. I just resigned myself
to never gaining levels (or getting really lucky). Better matchmaking
just makes the [game I already enjoy more
fun](https://a16z.com/2020/01/13/game-design-not-gamification/). New
levels feel attainable now.

---

This reminds me of an attempt a few years ago to do [matchmaking on
Stack
Overflow](https://meta.stackoverflow.com/questions/289702/help-build-a-good-find-the-next-question-to-answer-query). It
didn't end up working as expected, but the idea is solid. When someone
answers one question, they may very well be in the answering mood. So
giving them suggestions about what to answer next should be
productive. Discourse (my current favorite example of community
software) has [a Suggested
Topics](https://meta.discourse.org/t/how-does-discourse-determine-what-suggested-topics-to-show/125805)
feature that doesn't try to get too fancy. For discussions, suggesting
topics that have new replies since the last time you visited works
great.

Perhaps more important than [limiting who you interact
with](/2020/09/24/ignoring_others.html), group software needs to open
connections with others who you don't _yet_ interact with. Sadly
Facebook seems more interested in connecting with _advertisers_ and
Twitter tends to [encourage interactions that stir up
anger](https://www.shamusyoung.com/twentysidedtale/?p=46541). Stack
Overflow connects people who are bored (or worse) of beginner
questions with . . . [beginner
questions](https://meta.stackoverflow.com/questions/392414/wheres-the-new-boatload-of-experts-who-can-explain-stuff-to-me-like-im-five/392487#392487). There
must be a better way.


