---
layout: post
title: 2019 in Review
comments: yes
tags: career
---

> If men used as much care in uprooting vices and implanting virtues
> as they do in discussing problems, there would not be so much evil
> and scandal in the world, or such laxity in religious
> organizations. On the day of judgment, surely, we shall not be asked
> what we have read but what we have done; not how well we have spoken
> but how well we have lived.&mdash;Thomas à Kempis

At Stack Exchange, I wrote the year-in-review post for:

* [2015](https://stackoverflow.blog/2016/01/12/year-in-review-2015/)
* [2016](https://stackoverflow.blog/2017/01/26/year-in-review-2016/)
* [2017](https://stackoverflow.blog/2018/01/31/stack-exchange-2017-review/)

If you look on the dates of those posts, you'll notice they come later
and later in January. Indeed, 2017 pushed it to the limit by being
posted on the 31<sup>st</sup>. My excuse is that it sometimes takes a
month to organize one's thoughts about the events of a year.

I won't be posting about Stack Exchange in particular this year
because (spoiler alert) [I no longer work
there](https://jlericson.com/2020/01/17/leaving_stack.html). Instead,
I want to recount the events of my life that occurred in 2019 and draw
a few conclusions that will, I anticipate, be of interest to
others. If you aren't religious (and haven't already been put off by
the Thomas à Kempis quote), don't worry about the first item. It's
about what I learned as a recruiter.

## Finding a new pastor

My family has been going to going to [Emmanuel Church in
Burbank](https://www.emmanuelburbank.org/) for years. It's fantastic
place to make friends. We also have great choir, which gives me a
musical outlet. And, of course, it's an excellent place to practice
our Christian faith. Back in 2017, our senior pastor stepped down and
I was part of the team to search for a replacement. Since we are a
[congregational
church](https://www.efca.org/blog/understanding-scripture/evangelical-free-church),
we get to hire our own pastor. In many ways, it's like hiring a CEO
except that the entire organization is able to vote on the candidate.

Our process began with an extensive time of self-discovery. We
conducted surveys and focus groups. We had a workshop with
consultants. We put together a set of core values. I edited a church
profile written by the search team. We created a job description for
the new pastor so that we'd know who to look for.

It was only in 2019 that we began to interview candidates. Many could
be eliminated by comparing their resumes to our job description. We
listened to sermons and conducted phone interviews. A handful of
candidates made it to in-person interviews. Only one, the pastor we
finally selected, got called back. Finally we presented the candidate
to the congregation.

While our by-laws require a 3/4 vote, most pastoral candidates won't
accept the position unless the vote hits a higher threshold. It's just
a lot harder to lead a church when a significant percentage of the
people stand opposed to bringing a leader onboard. After several weeks
of meetings with various groups in the congregation, our new pastor
came up for his vote. Only one person voted against.

The odd thing is the pastor we hired expressed interest very early on
in the process. Several of us had a sense that he was the right person
for the job well before the first interview. We could have saved over
a year of waiting if we'd just hired him from the start. But that
would have been a mistake. In my estimation, it was only by going
through the process that we were able to have confidence in our
decision.

## Long-awaited changes

I was involved in two changes on Stack Exchange that were long
overdue. The first [retired the Tumbleweed and Reversal
badges](https://stackoverflow.blog/2019/06/18/adios-to-unfriendly-badges-ahoy-lifejacket-and-lifeboat/)
while creating Lifejacket and Lifeboat badges. The second [increased
the reputation for question upvotes from +5 to
+10](https://stackoverflow.blog/2019/11/13/were-rewarding-the-question-askers/).
I'm a fan of both updates that make small, but meaningful changes to
the way the site appears to new users. For whatever reason,[^1] Stack
Overflow has neglected [creating
pathways](https://jlericson.com/2019/06/22/disneyland.html) for users,
so these improvements are like rain during a drought.

In 2019, the Community Team was given a directive to reduce our use of
Meta. On the one hand, I get it. Employees posting on Meta were
repeatedly dismissed as incompetent. I even [wrote an appeal for
compassion](https://meta.stackexchange.com/q/314089/1438) when it
comes to designers, who often got the worst of it. On the other, "Meta
is Toxic" seemed to be code for "It's hard to understand our users and
it'd be easier if they didn't exist." I doubt anyone actually said or
even thought that, but that's how it felt to me.

Meanwhile, most of the details of the badge swap were worked out over
the years on Meta. The requests to remove the two retired badges and
the suggestion that became the two new badges were first floated by
the community on Meta. So when I wrote the blog post, I was in the odd
situation of announcing a feature intended to make the site more
welcoming that was largely designed by the very community that was
labeled (by other employees) as particularly unwelcoming.

The reputation change was supposed to coincide with a public relations
push. We had a very tight timetable to prepare so that we'd meet
marketing's schedule. I particularly wanted to reach out to moderators
on their private Q&A, but I had to ask them to not discuss the change
because it was under a press embargo. The moderators gave me excellent
feedback which helped me anticipate community concerns. However,
because of ongoing conflict between the company and moderators,
someone leaked my announcement. As far as I can tell, the only
marketing done around the change was the blog post announcing it.

To a lesser degree I helped with other features the [Public Q&amp;A
Team](https://stackoverflow.blog/2019/08/20/meet-the-public-qa-team/)
shipped last year.[^2] That team has done some amazing work. But many
users didn't notice because the company seems distracted by other
priorities.

## Sabbatical

It was with more wishfulness than hope that I asked my new employer
about their sabbatical policy. Like most companies, they don't have
one. Stack Overflow, however, offered four weeks after five years
plus a week for each following year. Since I passed six years last
summer, I chose to take a four-week[^3] sabbatical. My plan was to
write a book, but I ended up mostly spending time with family, which
was an excellent use of the time.

![Backpacking camp](/images/sabbaticamp.jpg)

I've reached the stage in life were time is more valuable than
money. My wife didn't have enough vacation to stay with us the entire
time and my son had a summer camp. So for a good chunk of time it was
me with my twins. We enjoyed time with my brothers and their families. We
visited aunts, uncles, nephews[^4] and cousins. We caravaned across
eastern Washington with my parents. Most importantly, we all got to
see my granny who is in her 90s and suffered a broken hip
recently. These are memories I will always treasure.

Stack Overflow is not perfect, but it does remote right (for those who
are not required to work at the office, that is). I really appreciated
remote holiday parties where I'd take my family out to some event,
restaurant or whatnot that the company would pay for. When [Teams
launched](https://stackoverflow.blog/2018/05/23/how-stack-overflow-for-teams-fits-into-the-community/),
we could expense a substitute whatever food the office provided for
the celebration. (I picked empanadas, natch.) We had extensive
flexibility in our schedules to do things like go shopping in the
middle of the day or take care of sick kids.

## House hunt

While I was in Idaho with _extremely limited_ internet, my wife sold
our condo in Burbank and made an offer on a house. I only saw about
half the photos online, but we've been looking for years and I trust
her judgment. Despite offering over the asking price, we ended up
being a backup offer. (I believe behind _another_ backup offer.) It
was extremely disappointing, but we both felt encouraged that we were
even in a place to make offers. 

When we got back to Burbank, our condo was in escrow, so we needed to
make more offers. Our real estate agent showed us a few places that
weren't right&mdash;too expensive, too small, run down, bad location
or a combination of the above. A few weeks later, he asked if we'd be
willing to "think outside the box". What that meant was he found a
house that's smaller than the condo we were selling. But it does have
a large garage, including a finished attic where my son could have a
room.

To make the story far shorter, we made an offer and it was
accepted. After years of searching, we moved into a new house last
fall. Every house has surprises in store for new residents, but almost
all the surprises this house gave us have been positive. We've been
able to host birthday parties, missionaries, volunteer meetings,
Thanksgiving and other events that we couldn't do in our condo. I even
enjoy mowing the lawn and taking care of our gardens. I don't ever
want to move again.

## Job

I explained some of [my reasons for leaving Stack
Overflow](https://jlericson.com/2020/01/17/leaving_stack.html).[^5]
When I wrote that post, my emotions were raw. Emotions spur action,
but I wanted my explanation to be well reasoned. I have edited out
many angry, unhelpful and spiteful words from my writing (both in
public and directly to the people who make and influence decisions at
the company) over the last few months. I don't think my emotional
state should color my criticisms. The result was deliberately vague:
"Unfortunately, their decisions repeatedly violated my standards for
healthy community management."

But when I summarize the year that was 2019, I'd be plastering over
personal pain and grief if I didn't write more specifically about what
happened from my perspective. Being honest about what I was going
through requires more detail. The difficulty is I only know a slice of
the story and I don't want to call out people who may very well have
been limited by circumstances outside of their control. I considered
using [my anonymizer
script](https://github.com/jericson/anonymize.rb), but the characters
in this story would be easily identifiable to many observers. So I'm
just going to focus on the effects of company decisions on me.

[Monica Cellio's
account](https://judaism.meta.stackexchange.com/questions/5193/stack-overflow-inc-sinat-chinam-and-the-goat-for-azazel)
gives context. The week she described was one of the most miserable I
ever experienced in my career. I could see a conflict that began in a
relatively private place (the moderators' chat room) threatened to
spill into very public places. I have [long
held](https://judaism.stackexchange.com/q/14358/971) as a universal
principle of ethics that admonishing another person should be done
privately. Public rebukes without first attempting to resolve the
situation privately violates our shared morality. So that week I sent
an email to others in the company stating my intention to call Monica
in order to attempt reconciliation.

I was told to disengage. Since I'd already arranged to meet, I did the
call anyway. I told Monica upfront that I was there to listen and that
I didn't have authority to make any decisions in this case.[^6] I
reported back our conversation, but nobody with that authority ever
asked me about it. By Friday it was clear Monica's position as a
moderator was in jeopardy. I wrote an email to people at my church who
pray for me:

> I'm facing an ethical dilemma at work this afternoon which might
> require me to not do something I'm being asked to do. Obviously it
> would be great if the situation changed so my company doesn't do the
> unethical thing. But if I need to refuse, I'd appreciate prayer that
> I'd be able to persevere.

I was referring to removing Monica's moderator access since that was
something I did regularly when moderators stepped down. As it happens
the decision to go ahead with removing her diamonds happened while I
was at my son's soccer practice. So someone else at the company pulled
the trigger. If I had been asked, I would have refused. At the time, I
worried that would have meant the beginning of the end of my
employment at Stack Overflow. Now I wonder if the die had already been
cast.

I said in [a previous
post](https://jlericson.com/2020/01/17/leaving_stack.html): "This
isn’t exactly a protest resignation." What I meant was I had a chance
to resign in protest far earlier. But I was afraid. I didn't know if
my skills as a community manager were in demand and we'd just bought a
new (and[ very
expensive](https://twitter.com/jlericson/status/1222258235962322944))
house. I thought there might be some ways I could influence decisions
at the company. And so I stayed. I also began writing emails to people
up and down the chain of command to see if the unhealthy ways the
company was interacting with the community could be corrected. While
some people seemed to be willing to listen, I saw no fruit from those
emails.

A couple of weeks later, I got a Facebook message from a college
friend. (We had been, in fact, roommates and in each other's wedding
party.) His organization had just inherited [College
Confidential](https://www.collegeconfidential.com/) and they didn't
have any experience running an online community. When my friend
remembered I was a community manager at Stack Exchange, he flew down
to pick my brain for an afternoon. What I didn't know was that this
was a stealth job interview. At the end of the day, he told me there
might be consulting work for me in 2020.

The contrast between the company that had been all about community
from the beginning and the company that suddenly found itself with a
business unit that had a community component was stark. One seemed to
have no interest in my experience and the other was eager to learn
from me. We are not given to know what-might-have-been, but I can't
imagine [this timeline](https://stackexchange-timeline.webflow.io/) if
leadership had listened to its experts in community.

## Conclusion

> "But what would have been the good?"  
> Aslan said nothing.  
> "You mean," said Lucy rather faintly, "that it would have turned out
all right&mdash;somehow? But how? Please, Aslan! Am I not to know?"  
> "To know what would have happened, child?" said Aslan. "No. Nobody
is ever told that."  
> "Oh dear," said Lucy.  
>"But anyone can find out what will happen," said Aslan. "If you go
back to the others now, and wake them up; and tell them you have seen
me again; and that you must all get up at once and follow
me&mdash;what will happen? There is only one way of finding
out."&mdash;C.S. Lewis, Prince Caspian

God blessed me in 2019. There is simply no other way I can look a the
year that was. As hard as some aspects of the year were for me and
people I care about, it was a year of clarification. Things that had
been in the works for years (a new pastor, a new house, frustrations
at Stack Exchange) finally resolved. My situation in 2020 is markedly
better than it was in 2018. For that, I'm grateful.



[^1]: Well, I have some ideas, but they aren't terribly charitable. 

[^2]: And a few I expect to see shipped this year.

[^3]: Leaving one week so that I could take a second sabbatical a year
    earlier. In theory.

[^4]: My daughter is the only one on my side of the family.

[^5]: Not for the [first
    time](https://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/42481/the-problem-with-extrinsic-motivation),
    however. I suppose I'm a serial Stack Overflow quitter. 

[^6]: In retrospect, this was a giant red flag. One of the great joys
    of community management is having agency to resolve community
    conflict. It's already been [a highlight of my new
    job](https://twitter.com/jlericson/status/1222602219503026176). Taking
    away this agency was a clear sign my contributions were not valued.
