---
layout: post
title: Parable of the rose garden
comments: yes
date: 2020-02-07
tags: community 
---


Last fall, during a very rough week, I wrote [a melancholy parable
about Stack
Exchange](https://medium.com/@jlericson/emptiness-a-parable-ee46a8a1cad6). I'm
not sure if anyone read it and understood the significance, but that's
ok. I do a lot of writing for my own benefit. Since then, I've thought
of another parable that might be more hopeful.


At my new house we have a bunch of rose bushes. It's very clear they
were well taken care of, but in recent years they have been allowed to
grow as they will. We got a few decent roses in the fall, but the
bushes are starting to pull down the fence pegs holding them up. Now
is the time to prune. I read a couple of articles, I own pruning
shears and I have gloves to wear. But I don't really know what I'm
doing. I just sorta hack away at the roses and rely on them being very
robust. I'm learning and it's my garden, so I don't feel
bad. Cultivators of roses (rosarians) would probably cringe to watch
me do this, but it needs to be done and I'm the only person likely to
do it. If this were [Exposition
Park](https://www.laparks.org/park/exposition-rose-garden), I'd have a
staff of experts to do it right.

{% include add_image.html image="roses.jpg" %}

So to get back to Stack Exchange, the sites have moderators who behave
something like expert gardeners. They prune questions that are aren't
producing useful answers. They even prune users who damage the
community. Over the years, they've developed a standard of moderation.
But pruning is more than just cutting deadwood. It's also about
creating a pleasing shape. That's not something hundreds of moderators
can do. There needs to be what [the younger President Bush calls The
Decider](https://youtu.be/irMeHmlxE9s). Someone who has a vision for
the sites.


For a long time the vision for the sites was something like cultivated
wild roses. They were carefully planted far enough apart (the Area 51
process) and allowed to grow as is natural. A lot of beautiful gardens
grow like this and it isn't hard to do.  But in recent years people at
the company have looked at the sites and wonder why they don't look
like [a traditional European rose
garden](https://www.huntington.org/rose-garden).  The analogy is about
to break up, but think of how complicated it would be to convert from
one type of garden to another. It took years to get where we are, so
starting over is not a great idea. Transplanting or grafting might
work, but those are traumatic and require skill.

Whatever steps are required, the first thing is to have a plan. Start
with an accurate inventory of what you have and sketch out a
landscaping diagram of where you want to be. Plot out the steps needed
to get from here to there while considering practical details such as
climate. Maybe there is a plan, but it was never clear to me as
community manager. We got very narrow directives ("prune that branch",
"find this variety to graft in", "stop using that soil", etc.) and
tried to guess what the goal was from there.

That's not entirely fair. We had [stratospheric
goals](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2001/04/21/dont-let-architecture-astronauts-scare-you/)
like “Helping write the script of the future by serving developers and
technical workers.” But we were missing the link between that goal and
the things we were asked to do. I mean, we could _guess_. So we often
had uncomfortable conversations where we'd question tactical decisions
("um, that rose needs way more sun than it gets where you want to put
it.") and be accused of not caring about the overarching company
goals.

One thing people learn the hard way over and over is that if you leave
a void in communication, your listener will inevitably fill in *the
worst possible options*. "Why aren't they telling me what's going on?
Do they hate me?"  I think this can kinda work if you have some hold
on people. It's a lousy work environment, but management can totally
skip the communication step from time to time. It's really a bad idea
when working with a community, however. Never forget people can just
stop coming.

In fact, I know of two projects designed to replace Stack
Exchange. They aren't quite at the point where I'd want to point
people at them, but both are actively working in that direction.  Back
in the day we were bemused by these sorts of projects. They never
seemed to understand that the software was the easy part and community
is the real selling point. Most of these sites died and the ones that
live on have cultivated some sort of community.

What should keep SO leadership up at night is that these two projects
were motivated by moving existing communities somewhere else. It's as
if my roses could see how inexpertly I was pruning them and decided to
transplant themselves to my neighbor's garden.  It's too soon to know
if these projects are real threats to the SO business model. They
might take long enough to develop that investors can have their
long-awaited equity event. They might not even threaten the SO
community. It's always possible to have more than one site.  But the
failure case is catastrophic. One day business will look fine and the
next day it won't. If leadership isn't already hearing the claxons
now, they won't have any warning at all. Because people are free to
interpret the message any way they like and are free to leave.

To be super clear: I want Stack Exchange to thrive. I want the
projects people are working on to replace the network to be viable
competition so that SO gets better at meeting real community needs. I
want a world where the Q&A model delivers practical information to
everyone.  But for that to happen, the company needs to be very
different than the one I left. Someone needs to take ownership,
acknowledge the mistakes of the past and show real
leadership. Otherwise it looks like my inexpert pruning with only a
vague goal.

--

Originally [published on
Twitter](https://threadreaderapp.com/thread/1225859081904115712.html).
