---
layout: post
title: The Power of Story
comments: yes
issue: 14
tags: community
image: /images/lion_fountain.jpg
---

I was getting our side yard ready to have a Mother's Day celebration
and as I cut back the climbing fig that covers our side wall, I
discovered something amazing:

![Lion Head fountain I found in overgrown climbing fig on my side yard
wall.](/images/lion_fountain.jpg) 

When I posted this picture on Facebook, my brother asked if it might not
be a passage to Narnia. Of course that's ridiculous. It's obviously a
fountain a previous owner installed when the wall was new. Later the
fountain stopped working (perhaps because the hose was cut by
accident) and they converted it into a planter. Finally the climbing fig
covered the planter leaving a mysterious protrusion, which I
investigated as I trimmed back the vines.

And yet, I too wondered if this might not be the face of Aslan, the
lion who makes his way into all the Narnian stories. Indeed, I felt
very much like the Pevensie children in the early chapters of _Prince
Caspian_ when they come to the realization the ruins they discovered
are actually the castle Cair Paravel. I know full well that Narnia and
Aslan are the product of Lewis' imagination. As much as I'd like my
little yard to be a slice of Narnia, there will never be _real_
centaurs or fauns or dryads here. But I also know that the stories
Lewis wrote, the characters he described and the places he created
transcend his books.


## How to read _The Chronicles of Narnia_

A short digression for people who are new to the works of C. S. Lewis
or who would like to introduce them to the next generation. If you buy
a modern edition of the collection, you will likely see that _The
Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe_ is numbered as the second in the
series. Older editions put it first, as you might have expected from
the adaptations for film and television.

There's not much mystery to the puzzle. Lewis wrote _The Lion, the
Witch and the Wardrobe_ as a stand-alone volume. Later he added to the
Narnian stories proceeding roughly chronologically. Two books,
however, broke the pattern. The minor break was _The Horse and His
Boy_, which tells a story that occurs in the years described in the
last chapter of the original book. It's a wonderful story, but it
doesn't really impact the plot of the series.

_The Magician's Nephew_, however, does introduce important backstory
since it details the origins of Narnia. If read first, it creates a
very satisfying arc for the series. Read as an epic, it makes perfect
sense to start there, just as it makes sense to begin reading the
Bible at Genesis or _The Lord of the Rings_ with _The Hobbit_. (Or
even _The Silmarillian_!) And so the publisher changed the order of
the boxed sets. After all, this is the logical order and it's only a
trick of history they were ever read any other way.

Perhaps because I grew up reading (and hearing) Narnia in publication
order, I don't think chronological is the best experience. At least
not for being introduced to Narnia. After much consideration, I have
come up with a reason that, I believe, justifies starting with _The
Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe_: it's the best way to get to know
Aslan.

The lion of Narnia became a richer character as Lewis wrote the
books. It isn't really a spoiler to say that he began as a Christ
figure and a very direct one at that. Over the course of the books
leading up the _The Magician's Nephew_ (especially _The Voyage of the
Dawn Treader_) he comes into his own. Yes, he still stands in for
Jesus in these stories, but he's also something more, if that's not
blasphemous to say. Getting to know him starting with the prequel
changes his character development. Discovering Aslan along the same
path that C. S. Lewis did works better than starting with the
backstory.

That's how I read it to my children the first time through. My
daughter wanted to hear the books again and I suggested we try
chronologically. Once you know the characters, that way works
fine. It's the just the first time through when you need to meet
people in the right order.

## Stories connect

From what I've read by atheists and other skeptics of religion,
creation stories exist because of humanity's need to understand the
world around us. Before the advent of technologies such as the
telescope and the particle accelerator, people settled for obviously
wrong, but somehow comforting fables. After the discovery of the Big
Bang and DNA, we can put these misleading stories behind us.

Still, I find the thing that tempts me to atheism isn't improved
understanding offered by science. Science is perfectly compatible with
my faith, after all. No, the attractive thing is the narrative of an
uncaring universe that produced, via simple Darwinian mechanisms, a
people who can understand the inevitability of the second law of
thermodynamics. And rather than despair, that people found beauty in
the world and in each other.

You see, the thing that connects people is the stories they
tell. Sharing my discovery of "Aslan" in my garden created connection
within the community of Narnia. We all had the same thought because we
know the story of Narnia includes seemingly ordinary objects in our
world being portals to another realm. If you aren't part of that
community, it must seem a little strange. We are eager to invite you
in, but there is only one entrance. You must share in the stories that
C. S. Lewis told.[^1] Once you do, you belong.

And this is true of any community. Stack Overflow tells a story of
expert programmers providing answers so that everyone can find them
(if they know how to search). Stack Exchange tells a story of sharing
all types of knowledge using the same system. I'm still learning the
story of College Confidential, but it involves helping students chart
their futures. Until I learn the story and can tell it myself, I am an
outsider to the community.

## Stack Overflow lost its story

Lately, I've been [pointing out leadership's failure to communicate a
plan](/2020/02/07/rose_parable.html) and that still is a criticism I
have. My guess is that executives and investors at Stack Overflow
don't agree with my assessment. They probably look at communication
such as [the quarterly CEO
update](https://meta.stackexchange.com/q/347549/1438), [the
podcast](https://stackoverflow.blog/podcast/) and [the Community
Roadmap](https://stackoverflow.blog/2020/04/08/q2-community-roadmap/)
as more-than-sufficient communication. I certainly appreciate the
effort and even a good deal of the content. But it isn't exactly
compatible with the stories the community tells. They are, rather,
investor stories.

Stack Overflow, in particular, became valuable because it was a
searchable catalog of all sorts of arcane knowledge about
programming. The story the company tells [about
itself](https://stackoverflow.com/company) manages to miss that point
altogether:

> Helping write the script of the future by serving developers and all
> technologists.

It's not a bad slogan in the context of a business that sells job
listings, ads for programming tools and private knowledge collection
systems. These products _do_ serve developers. But the killer feature
of Stack Overflow has always been that you can Google an obscure
error, find one of the few other people who have encountered it and
see how they solved the problem. The site's value is more humble than
a marketing message can convey.

Or look at [the site's HTML title
tag](view-source:https://stackoverflow.com/):

> Stack Overflow - Where Developers Learn, Share, & Build Careers

In addition to the particularly senseless Oxford comma, this tagline
misses the most common thing developers do on the site: solve their
problem and move on. While it's certainly possible for developers to
learn on Stack Overflow, regular users know the same questions are
asked time and again. Which isn't to say this is a bad slogan; it's
just one that doesn't connect with the stories the community believes
about itself.



<!--Let me explain with an analogy. Suppose you were assigned the world's
most pedantic editor.  They scrutinize every sentence you write in
emails, documents and chat. If there is a mistake, they respond in
one of three ways:

1. Circle the mistake in red marker with a note.
2. Return the sentence with an generic error such as "spelling",
   "grammar" or "punctuation".
3. Allow the sentence to be published, but randomly change its meaning
   or the meaning of surrounding sentences.
   
This would be more bearable if the editor used standard English. But
this editor has some idiosyncratic tendencies. For instance, they
don't use the Oxford comma in preference to the [Cambridge
comma](https://www.glossophilia.org/2013/04/oxford-cambridge-a-new-battleground-for-an-old-rivalry/). Because
the I before E rule has so many exceptions, this editor requires E
before I. It's more reasonable since the order is alphabetical. They
also avoid the one-or-two-spaces controversy by allowing either unless
the sentence ends a paragraph. In that case, there must only be one
space.

Learning the rules requires reading an almost impenetrable manual of
style. The good news is that thousands of other writers also use the
same proofreader and they've created a site for answering questions:
Letter Overflow. (It's named after a common and cryptic error reported
when a sentence uses more than the allowed number of E's.) Thanks to
that site, everyone who must satisfy each editor (and there are
hundreds of them) can learn how to fix problems with their sentences.

Now a new owner has taken over Letter Overflow. They notice a lot of
new authors struggle to write sentences and that LO is a great tool
for people to understand proofreaders. So they come up with a new slogan: 

> Helping write the sentences of the future by serving authors.

Next they told the people using the site to be nicer to new users and
to stop pointing out all the mistakes they were making. Nobody wants
to be criticized after all. When the users push back that they are just explaining the hard reality of working with these

-->

I often felt people at Stack Overflow who hadn't used the site were
somehow ashamed of it. They looked at regular users and saw [unearned
privilege](/2019/05/20/meristocracy.html). I'm not sure they
understood that becoming a developer is more than [accumulating
knowledge about languages and
frameworks](/2015/04/22/cs_females.html). Instead of investing in
features such as
[Documentation](https://meta.stackoverflow.com/questions/354217/sunsetting-documentation)
or
[mentoring](https://meta.stackoverflow.com/questions/353845/stack-overflow-mentorship-research-project)
that would have given space for experts to assist new users, the
company insisted the problem was [implicit
bias](https://stackoverflow.blog/2018/04/26/stack-overflow-isnt-very-welcoming-its-time-for-that-to-change/).[^2]
The truth is programming languages are pedantic jerks and you gotta
have a little bit of that in you to succeed in working with them.

There has never been a force powerful enough to eradicate a story as
long as there are people willing to tell it. That cuts both ways. The
company can't compel users to accept their marketing messages and the
community can't change what the company has decided it needs to do to
run its business. But both sides can start telling stories to bridge
those gaps.[^3] Just as stories can be told to exclude (like an
inside joke) they can also be used to include. It just requires people
to be open to listening to others to incorporate their point of view.

---

Footnotes:

[^1]: Even in movie or TV-special form! Though I do think it necessary
    to read the books if you really want to understand.

[^2]: Which isn't to say it _isn't_ a problem. It's just not a very
    useful story to tell if you want people to change their behavior.

[^3]: My wife wasn't a _Lord of the Rings_ fan before she graciously
    sat through the movies with me. At the end of the _The Fellowship
    of the Ring_, she noticed the
    [brooches](https://tolkiengateway.net/wiki/Elven_brooches) the
    characters were wearing. She asked me about it afterward, which
    delighted me because it was a detail the film-makers added because
    it was important to fans of the series. It formed a deeper
    connection between my wife and I. I was also pleased that the
    extended edition included [the gift-giving
    scene](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p9FdKBVpkec) that showed a
    moment of reconciliation between Dwarves and Elves.

<!--  LocalWords:  Aslan Dwarves
 -->
