---
layout: post
title: A day in Reserve
tags: baseball
comments: yes
image: /images/infield_reserve.jpg
---

My wife decided to buy tickets a month before [the Dodgers game on
September 12,
2021](https://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgers/story/2021-09-12/max-scherzer-records-3000-strikeouts-perfect-game-dodgers-padres). We
picked a Sunday match so that our children could do the "Kids Run the
Bases" event that's scheduled after the game on most Sundays at Dodger
Stadium. The Padres had just [fallen out of contention to win the
division](https://www.fangraphs.com/standings/playoff-odds-graphs?lg=NL&div=W&stat=div&year=2021),
but still have an exciting roster. On Friday and Saturday, the Dodgers
won fairly close games to set up a sweep.

Starting for the Padres was Blake Snell, who dominated the Dodgers in
the 2020 World Series and was [memorably pulled in the sixth
inning](https://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgers/story/2020-10-27/dodgers-world-series-game-6-hernandez)
of game six. He was a Tampa Bay Ray at the time, but San Diego [traded
to get
him](https://www.latimes.com/sports/story/2020-12-27/padres-blake-snell-trade-luis-patino-cole-wilcox-francisco-mejia-blake-hunt)
in the off-season as a part of the National League West arms race in
southern California.

Earlier in the season, Los Angeles [acquired Max
Scherzer](https://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgers/story/2021-07-30/dodgers-trade-for-max-scherzer-trae-turner-complete)
(and, oh by the way, MVP-candidate Trea Turner) to simultaneously
strengthen their rotation[^1] _and_ block the Padres from getting
him. Unfortunately, the Dodgers lost most of Clayton Kershaw's season to
injury and Dustin May had surgery back in May.[^2] So Scherzer's arm,
rented for the second half, could not have been more welcome.  He was
scheduled to start the game just 6 strikeouts away from reaching 3,000
for his career. So it turned out we'd picked an excellent game to
attend.

![The view from my seat.](/images/infield_reserve.jpg)

Our day started as a normal Sunday going to church. Before heading to
Chavez Ravine, we grabbed some In-N-Out and ordered takeout from an
Indian place for the vegetarian in the family. No need to add
over-priced hot dogs[^3] to our tab. Traffic wasn't terrible and I was
feeling good about getting to our seats on time. Unfortunately our
parking spot was on the outer reaches of the lot. To make matters
worse, my daughter's blue and white pom-poms were not allowed in the
stadium. So I hurried back to the car and heard the pregame as I
returned to the stadium.

Dodger Stadium recently got a renovation that gives fans access to
pretty much all areas no matter where their seats might be. So I
walked around the first base field level watching the top of the
first. Scherzer started off with a strikeout to Trent Grisham. 5 to go
for his 3k milestone. Next two batters quickly out on fly balls and I
climbed up the stairs to the Reserve level.

I reached our seats in time to see Mookie Betts foul a ball off the
ledge a section or two closer to home plate. My son had taken my glove
when I ran back to the car and the rest of the family hadn't made it
to our seats yet. That was the closest a foul ball would get to
us. Left-handed batters have their back to our seats and right-handed
batters would have needed to swing very late to get into our section
of the second deck. Still, there's something comfortable about taking
a glove to a game even if there's no real chance to use it.

Snell seemed to be on his game and got Betts and Max Muncy out on fly
balls. The crowd, including my family, was still finding their
seats. Seemed like we were in for a pitchers' dual. And then, well
it's always hard to tell from the stands what's going on when player
substitutions happen. All I could see was the Padres manager taking
out Snell and bringing in a new pitcher. Clearly this was an injury
since the new pitcher, Nabil Crismatt, was given plenty of time warm
up. Meanwhile, my family arrived having walked the long way around the
stadium.

We'd tried to find a place that would get shade most of the game when
we'd picked out seats. Sure enough our row was in the shade as we got
settled. But as I looked up, I realized we'd be in the sun all
afternoon if it peeked over the edge of the upper deck. It did and we
were forced to slather on sunscreen and sweated puddles from the third
inning on. Occasional breezes gave moments of relief.

After the pitching change Trea Turner was up with two outs. He
promptly singled and stole second. We don't get as much of that sort
of action these days compared to the 80s when I started watching the
game. A stolen base is one of the more exciting plays to see in person
because you can see the instant the runner makes his break. On TV, the
first indication is that the catcher starts to prepare to throw down
even before receiving the pitch. From the stands, you can experience
the entire play from the lead to the jump to fielders moving in the
infield to other fans noticing the attempt.

With one Turner in scoring position, Justin Turner had a chance to
drive in the first run, but he lined out to third instead. It happens
so quickly, you can hardly believe the fielder had time to react. In
the past, fans might miss it and need to ask around to find someone
who had seen it. Or bring a transistor radio to hear Vin Scully
describe the play. But these days there's a replay on screens behind
the outfield bleachers. The Dodgers kept the same mid-century modern
hexagons for their scoreboards, but replaced the lightbulbs with
high-definition LED panels.

Back to Scherzer, needing 5 strikeouts for the milestone, in the top
of the second facing the heart of the Padre order. From the reserve
section, we couldn't see what pitches he threw, but we saw the result:
1, 2, 3 strikeouts. You got the feeling he would have accomplished the
task right then if baseball allowed five out innings. What I didn't
notice at the time was that he got three outs on just nine
pitches. This is something of a rare event[^4] called an immaculate
inning.

<iframe src="https://streamable.com/m/max-scherzer-s-immaculate-inning" width="560" height="315"></iframe>


After the Padre reliever put away three straight Dodgers, Scherzer
struck out Will Myers on a full count. We now expected every out to be
a strike out. Instead Austin Nola grounded out to Cory Seager on the
next pitch and the Padre pitcher grounded out to the Dodger
pitcher. All around the stadium you could hear audible
groans. Everyone (besides a sprinkling of Padre fans) wanted that
3,000<sup>th</sup> strikeout.

Dodgers up in the third and Gavin Lux singled bringing Scherzer to the
plate. The pitcher [hasn't gotten on base since
2019](https://www.baseball-reference.com/players/s/scherma01.shtml#batting_standard). Last
year National League pitchers didn't need to bat, so he had that
excuse. Not this year since he's had 56 plate appearances. The only
positive result was an RBI sacrifice fly in August against the
Mets. With a runner on first and no outs, a pitcher's job is to lay
down a sacrifice bunt to move the runner closer to scoring. Despite
Scherzer's amazing day as a pitcher, his futility with the bat
continued. He bunted strike three foul to get the one sort of
strikeout he doesn't enjoy.

Back to the top of the fourth and Scherzer got three straight outs
with no strikeouts. Seager hit a solo home run in the bottom of the
fourth, which seemed like it might be enough to win all by itself.[^5]
Now the drama was: When will Scherzer get another strikeout? Fernando
Tatis Jr. started the fifth and hit a fly out to center. Eric Hosmer
watched strike one and swung for strike two. This is it! Ball one. Ok,
no problem. Ball two. It happens. Ball three and the count was
full. The payoff pitch could be the 3k K so all around the stadium
people were recording the moment on their phones. Strike three and we
all rose cheering.

Scherzer famously doesn't like anything distracting him from his
job. He walked behind the mound, flipped his glove asking for a new
ball and seemed most interested in finishing the inning. But the crowd
wouldn't have it so he stepped to the top of the mound and
acknowledged the applause with a raised hat. Then he retired Tommy
Pham on a flyout.

Of course there's nothing significant about 3,000 strikeouts that
isn't almost as significant about 2,999. And while Scherzer is a
Dodger today, he got most of those strikeouts as [a
National](https://www.baseball-reference.com/players/s/scherma01.shtml#pitching_standard::21). There's
a good chance he won't be a Dodger in 2022. Finishing the inning and
getting as many outs as possible _this game_ was the
priority. Rightfully so. But as spectators and fans of the game, we
crave moments to appreciate greatness. We were thrilled to be there
when Max Scherzer hit an arbitrary accomplishment in [an already
accomplished
career](https://www.baseball-reference.com/leaders/SO_p_career.shtml).

The first hitter of the bottom of the fifth, Mookie Betts, hit a ball
way out into the left-field pavilion: a solo homer. Mookie joined the
team last year and signed a monster extension that means he'll be a
Dodger for most of the rest of his career. 2021 has been [his worst
year in the
majors](https://www.fangraphs.com/players/mookie-betts/13611/stats?position=OF),
but he still exudes joy on the field. 

Max Muncy came up next. I happened to a picture of the scoreboard
during his at-bat:

![The Padres shifted Max Muncy pretty heavily.](/images/muncy_shift.jpg)

Another thing we don't usually see on TV is the way fielders move from
one pitch to the next. Look at the Padre in shallow right
field. That's Manny Machado who typically plays third base. With a
pull-hitting lefty (Muncy) at the plate, he's essentially a shallow
outfielder here. The Dodger third baseman, Justin Turner, often shifts
right of second base with two strikes against a left-handed batter.

In this case, the fielding alignment didn't matter. Muncy struck
out. So did Trea Turner. And Justin Turner hit a fly ball. The
5<sup>th</sup> ended with the Dodgers ahead 2-0.

It was at this point that I noticed Scherzer hadn't given up a
hit. None of the Padres had even reached first base. Immaculate
innings are rare, but Max was halfway through a [perfect
game](https://www.baseball-almanac.com/pitching/piperf.shtml). There
hasn't been one of those since 2012.[^6] Superstition has it that one
should not mention a no-hitter while it's happening for fear it will
be broken up. So it's hard to know how many people were paying
attention.

Despite an early pitching changes and the mid-inning ovation, the game
had moved briskly. (It ended in 2 hours and 45 minutes, which is a
pretty good clip [this
season](https://www.baseball-reference.com/leagues/majors/misc.shtml#teams_standard_misc::3).)
We'd reached a sort of equilibrium going into the 6<sup>th</sup>. For
most of the game, my 8-year-old son was playing with a boy about his
age from the family next to us. My 8-year-old daughter sat next to me
and asked about what was going on. The family behind us had moved to
better seats. Everyone who hadn't eaten lunch outside the park were
finishing off their nachos, Dodger Dogs and beer. The guy sitting in
front of us, who must come to games often, worked through a novel
between innings. A relaxing afternoon for everyone who didn't notice
the complete lack of Padre baserunners.

Scherzer went back to work. He'd thrown 54 pitches in 5
innings&mdash;an efficient pace. With two more strike outs and a foul
tip out, he finished the top of the 6<sup>th</sup> with 66
pitches. The Dodgers went quietly in their half and Scherzer started
the 3<sup>rd</sup> time though the Padre order with a one-pitch fly
out. Then he missed the strike zone three times in a row to Adam
Frazier. With the perfect game on the line, he found the zone: called
strike, swinging strike and full-count fly ball.

Manny Machado came to the plate with two outs. Twice before the LA
crowd had booed his arrival at the plate. This time was no
different. Machado seems to have "earned" this response from his half
season with the Dodgers in 2018. He'd been acquired from Baltimore
with the idea that he'd finally push LA over the hump to win a World
Series. But he didn't preform particularly well in the championship
games against Boston. To make matters worse, he's the sort of player
who doesn't go full speed on routine ground-outs. In that series he
[admired a long
single](https://www.cbssports.com/mlb/news/world-series-manny-machado-gets-roasted-on-social-media-after-crushing-a-ball-off-the-wall-and-jogging-for-a-single/)
that _could_ have been a double off the wall. I suspect some people
boo him for not resigning with the Dodgers. Fans are fickle.

In any case, Machado worked a full count before [hitting a week
grounder back to
Scherzer](https://www.mlb.com/video/max-scherzer-in-play-out-s-to-manny-machado-vii5ke). 80
pitches. 21 outs and 21 batters. With a 2 run lead, Gavin Lux singled,
Scherzer bunted him to second, Betts singled, Max Muncy doubled
(scoring Lux), Trea Turner ground out, and Justin Turner hit a 396
foot homer to put the Dodgers ahead 6-0. The only drama left was Max's
perfect game.

Top of the 8<sup>th</sup> now. Fernando Tatis Jr. filed out.[^7] Eric
Hosmer at bat took a ball, a strike, another ball and then &hellip; lined
a double _just_ over Betts in right field. Perfect game and no-hitter
ended. For those who didn't know the significance, the outfield screen
showed the line score:

Team	| 1	| 2	| 3	| 4	| 5	| 6	| 7	| 8	| 9	| R	| H	| E |
--------|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
Padres	| 0	| 0	| 0	| 0	| 0	| 0	| 0	| 0	| 	| 0	| 1	| 0 |
Dodgers	| 0	| 0	| 0	| 1	| 1	| 0	| 4	| 	| 	| 6	| 8	| 0 |

Scherzer finished the inning by inducing a ground-out from Tommy Pham
and striking out Wil Myers. Once again the crowd stood as Max Scherzer
walked off the field. 92 pitches to get 24 outs and just one hit. An
exceptional performance.

But the game hadn't quite finished with its surprises. The Padres had
already used 6 pitchers. Snell's early exit meant this was essentially
a bullpen game. And after the previous inning they needed to get 3
more outs to put the series in the past. So Padres manager, Jayce
Tingler, brought in Austin Adams. He's a career 3.99 ERA pitcher who
strikes out or walks about half the batters he faces. [According to
Statcast](https://baseballsavant.mlb.com/savant-player/austin-adams-613534?stats=statcast-r-pitching-mlb),
the balls that are hit off him have low exit velocity meaning he's
likely to get people out with soft liners and slow grounders. He was
also the subject of [an article written a few days
earlier](https://www.theringer.com/mlb/2021/9/10/22666129/austin-adams-hit-by-pitch-record-hbp)
that pointed out he was 3 away from tying a season record in hitting
batters.[^8]

Adams had pitched [the Friday
before](https://www.fangraphs.com/boxscore.aspx?date=2021-09-10&team=Dodgers&dh=0&season=2021),
but got his three outs without plunking anyone. He didn't pitch on
Saturday so he remained three hit batters away from infamy. I didn't
know this at the time, of course. What I did know was that he hit the
first batter in the bottom of the 8<sup>th</sup>, Will Smith. Then Cody
Bellinger doubled, and Smith, fast for a catcher, advanced just the one
base. Then Adams hit Gavin Lux to load the bases. And _then_ he hit
Betts to bring in a run. My wife turned to me to ask how many batters
this guy would be allowed to hit before he got ejected. 

<iframe src="https://streamable.com/mlbfilmroom/00u84zeyhODng8wLr356/adams-gets-the-hbp-record-in-the-live-ball-era" width="560" height="315"></iframe>



<!--
select (select concat_ws(' ', max(first_name), max(last_name)) from retro_rosters where player_id = pit_id)pitcher, year, game_id "game", away_team_id "away team", inn_ct "inning", count(*) "batters hit" from retro_pbp where event_cd = 16 group by pit_id, year, game_id, inn_ct, away_team_id having count(*) >=3 order by year;

pitcher     | year |     game     | away team | inning | batters hit
:---------------|-----:|:-------------|:----------|-------:|------------:
 Ray Boggs      | 1928 | BSN192809170 | CHN       |      9 |           3
 Tom Morgan     | 1954 | BOS195406300 | NYA       |      3 |           3
 Raul Sanchez   | 1960 | CIN196005151 | PHI       |      8 |           3
 Dock Ellis     | 1974 | PIT197405010 | CIN       |      1 |           3
 Wilbur Wood    | 1977 | CAL197709100 | CHA       |      1 |           3
 Buddy Black    | 1988 | CLE198807080 | CAL       |      4 |           3
 Bert Blyleven  | 1988 | MIN198809280 | OAK       |      2 |           3
 Mark Gardner   | 1992 | MON199208150 | SLN       |      1 |           3
 Tom Candiotti  | 1997 | HOU199709130 | LAN       |      1 |           3
 C.J. Nitkowski | 1998 | FLO199808030 | HOU       |      8 |           3
 Steve Sparks   | 1999 | TBA199905220 | ANA       |      3 |           3
 Kazuhisa Ishii | 2003 | LAN200307230 | COL       |      4 |           3
 Brian Lawrence | 2003 | CHN200304220 | SDN       |      4 |           3
 Matt Clement   | 2004 | PIT200405281 | CHN       |      5 |           3
 Jeff Weaver    | 2004 | LAN200408210 | ATL       |      1 |           3
 Joe Kennedy    | 2007 | FLO200708140 | ARI       |      4 |           3
 Sergio Mitre   | 2007 | FLO200708310 | PHI       |      2 |           3
 Oliver Perez   | 2007 | NYN200709280 | FLO       |      3 |           3
 Javier Vazquez | 2010 | NYA201009230 | TBA       |      7 |           3
 Cesar Cabral   | 2014 | TBA201404180 | NYA       |      8 |           3
 Mike Pelfrey   | 2015 | MIN201505030 | CHA       |      4 |           3
 Raul Alcantara | 2016 | OAK201609050 | ANA       |      1 |           3
 Kirby Yates    | 2016 | NYA201606270 | TEX       |      9 |           3
 John Lackey    | 2017 | CHN201707250 | CHA       |      5 |           3
 Drew Storen    | 2017 | CIN201705080 | NYA       |      7 |           3
 David Price    | 2018 | KCA201807070 | BOS       |      5 |           3
 Jose Urena     | 2018 | MIA201803290 | CHN       |      1 |           3
 Pablo Lopez    | 2019 | ARI201909160 | MIA       |      1 |           3
 Pat Venditte   | 2019 | CIN201905060 | SFN       |      6 |           3
(29 rows)
-->

Maybe hitting 4 would have done the trick.[^9] Instead he gave up a
sacrifice fly to Max Muncy, walked Trea Turner and got another fly out
from Justin Turner. Other than the formality of the top of the ninth,
the game was over.

Our family did have one more activity to complete. I flagged down an
usher and asked where we needed to go for our children to run the
bases. He directed me to the area behind the outfield and warned me it
got crowded pretty quick down there. With apologies to Justin Bruihl,
a rookie reliever I'd never heard of pitching the final half-inning,
we gathered our gear and set out to the outfield concourse.

Dodger Stadium has [new glass
elevators](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f7inN7jKbM8) at the edge of
the reserve level. Our twins desperately wanted to ride down but only
one of the two elevators on the right field side was working that
day. So we waited and waited for our chance to ride down to the
outfield plaza. But there was no need to worry. The line was long, but
we were in no hurry. We even had time to go to the bathroom, look at
the memorabilia on display and play in the outfield playground.

![My twins playing just behind center field.](/images/dodger_play.jpg)

When we were let onto the field, we walked around the warning track to
first base. From the stands, it's hard to see how big and fast the
players are. Compared to basketball where every court is the same size
and NBA players look like the giants they are as they stride from one
basket to the other, baseball fields scale with the level of
competition. The city parks where we play tee ball and softball just
aren't as spacious as MLB parks.

More to the point, the distance between bases is as little as 50 feet
for tee ball, 60 feet for softball and 90 feet for professional
baseball. Our kids started running the bases from first, around second
and third, and on to home plate. We walked the other way: first to
home to meet up there. They didn't seem to be tired out, but they also
didn't have to get a hit to get on base.

As we walked up the third base line past the Dodger dugout, Max
Scherzer came out for his post-game interviews. He's slightly taller
than I am, but there's something larger than life about seeing a
ballplayer in person. He smiled and waved at the parents who reached
for their phones to grab a photo. And then he moved away while the
stadium staff hurried us into the stands. We wandered around a bit,
shopped in the team shop, took a few more pictures and walked back to
our car. A good day was had by all.



[^1]: The Dodger's also lost Trevor Bauer, who was last year's Cy
    Young winner and the highest paid player in baseball (for now). LA
    Times columnist, Bill Plaschke, called his signing
    ["purely embarrassing"](https://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgers/story/2021-09-11/signing-trevor-bauer-most-embarrassing). 
    I'd say that's revisionist history, though there were plenty of people who expressed 
    concern about [his treatment of women on Twitter](https://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgers/story/2021-02-12/new-dodgers-pitcher-trevor-bauer-social-media-behavior-explained).
    Ultimately Bauer's story is one of wanton cruelty and wasted talent. As helpful
    as he would be as a pitcher, I'm glad he's not a Dodger.

[^2]: I see what I did there.

[^3]: Dodger Dogs are a staple at Dodger Stadium. This season they
    [changed their supplier](https://laist.com/news/food/meet-your-new-dodger-dog-los-angeles-papa-cantellas) 
    from Farmer John, which had made Dodger Dogs 
    [since the team moved from Brooklyn](https://www.farmerjohn.com/our-story/?gclid=EAIaIQobChMIgODFqrzP8wIVKRitBh3AiwseEAAYASABEgJkTvD_BwE&gclsrc=aw.ds). So Farmer John and Dodger Dogs are synonymous to the point where
    I'm surprised they make other products. Meanwhile, the new supplier, Papa Cantella's is a relative 
    newcomer that was [founded in 1980](https://papacantella.com/about/). Both companies are based in
    [Vernon, California](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vernon,_California), population 112. The "city" 
    consists mostly industrial zones and the majority of residents are either employed or related to city 
    employees. Most of the housing is owned by the city. About 44,000 people commute in to work. Many
    of them are employed by meatpacking businesses. Dodger Dogs, whichever the supplier, taste fine, but
    are over-priced in the ballpark.

[^4]: Indeed only [104 have been recorded](https://www.baseball-almanac.com/feats/feats17.shtml). Compare
    that to [314 no-hitters](https://www.baseball-almanac.com/pitching/official-no-hitters.shtml).

[^5]: Spoiler: it was.

[^6]: Amazingly there were three that year!

[^7]: None of the Padres looks good that day, but Tatis is a true star. He's also the son of [the only player 
    to hit two grand slams in a single inning](https://jlericson.com/2021/05/14/install_pg.html). Tatis Sr. 
    did that at Dodger Stadium in 1999.

[^8]: But only if you exclude [a bunch of pitchers who hit batters before 1920 or so](https://www.baseball-reference.com/leaders/HBP_p_season.shtml). 
    A fellow named [Phil Knell](https://www.baseball-reference.com/players/k/knellph01.shtml) hit 54 batters 
    in 1891 when he played for the Columbus Solons. No I'd never heard or that team either, so you can see 
    why that "record" might not be relevant anymore.

[^9]: It would have also set the season record we didn't know he was chasing and I believe would have tied 
    the record for hit batters by a single pitcher in an inning. At least 29 other people have hit 3 batters 
    in an inning. A couple years ago, 
    [two Giants hit 4 batters in an inning](https://www.mlb.com/news/giants-pitchers-hit-4-batters-in-1-inning) 
    which hadn't been done since 1893.

<!--  LocalWords:  Scherzer Kershaw
 -->
