---
layout: post
title: "Slay the Spire: Difficult to play this excellent game on the iPhone"
tags: review game
comments: yes
date: 2021-03-04
---

I wrote [a review of Slay the Spire for
Steam](/2019/12/03/slay_the_spire.html). Later I bought the game for
my Phone and posted a review on the App Store. I hadn't realized that
posting there was the equivalent of writing on a piece of paper and
stapling it to a telephone pole. What's worse, I had to write using my
phone because Apple is apparently too good for the World Wide Web.

On a whim, I scrolled through [the
reviews](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/slay-the-spire/id1491530147#see-all/reviews)
and found mine. It was 3/5 stars and I wrote it on March 4, 2021. A
few things are now out-of-date, but I figured it wouldn't hurt to post
a copy below.

---

I enjoy Slay the Spire on my laptop and it seems a perfect fit for a
mobile game. Card-based games usually work well because the screen is
the appropriate size. Reading earlier reviews I saw this wasn’t a
perfect port but I figured I’d adapt.

The first problem is you can’t import progress from other
platforms. That didn’t seem terrible because I figured I’d enjoy
starting over. The the first time I unlocked cards it was exciting to
learn the systems. The second time feels like doing chores in order to
earn the full experience.

Second the app doesn’t allow other sources of sound to play. So no
audio books or podcasts. And you better love the music or play in
silence. Not many games do this and most earn the privilege by
integrating sound with gameplay. Super Hexagon is a fine
example. Turns out this is a huge annoyance for me.

The controls aren’t quite as terrible for me as it seems they are for
other reviewers. But it’s often hard to read the cards. There seems to
be no way to zoom in so they fill the screen. This is criminal since
the cards are the star of the game.

Again I figured I’d be fine since I’ve already played so much. But I
forget some details on a card and can only read a line or so. For
whatever reason cards on either side of my hand tends to be cut off. I
can only read them by dragging them up and then my finger obscures the
text.

While there is a bigger text option, it’s not big enough. I have a new
iPhone SE. I’m guessing I need a small iPad to be comfortable.

It just feels like an unfinished port. Everything works but it needs
to be scaled for a phone. Hopefully that will happen eventually but
until then I don’t think it’ll get much playing time from me.

---

Writing now in November of 2021 I have a few emendations:

1. There was an update after a year of no visible progress. It allows
   me to listen to audio books and podcasts, so that's a step in the
   right direction.
   
2. I recently learned that it's possible to [turn on an option to zoom
   in on the
   iPhone](https://support.apple.com/guide/iphone/zoom-iph3e2e367e/ios). It's
   intended as an accessibility option and I suppose that's how I'm
   using it. Not so much that my eyesight is hampered, but some ports
   to iOS are. Sadly it merely makes the game playable, not enjoyable.
   
3. I also learned I could AirPlay my screen to the TV. Then I
   remembered I have the Steam version of the game on my laptop, so
   what's the point? (Well, there are a few games I have on iOS, but
   not Steam, so I do use that trick occasionally. Still irritating.)
   
4. The Star Realms app works so much better. It makes any card nearly
   as tall as the screen (held in landscape) when you tap and hold. I
   should review that game. (But don't bother posting it to the app
   store.)
