---
layout: post
title: "Baba Is You: Pointers Are Puzzling"
tags: review game
comments: yes
image: /images/baba_is_pointer.png
---

> For some reason most people seem to be born without the part of the
> brain that understands pointers. Pointers require a complex form of
> doubly-indirected thinking that some people just can’t do, and it’s
> pretty crucial to good programming.&mdash;Joel Spolsky, ["The
> Guerrilla Guide to Interviewing (version
> 3.0)"](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2006/10/25/the-guerrilla-guide-to-interviewing-version-30/)

In programming, pointers are variables that contain not values, but
memory locations. It's a seemingly simple concept that causes
considerable confusion even if you do have "the part of the brain that
understands pointers". They also produce the strangest bugs. One of my
earliest C programs crashed _unless I was debugging it_. Eventually I
discovered the problem was my use of pointers.[^1]

Now I don't know if Joel is correct that some people can never learn
to understand pointers. But I do know that it's easy to get turned
around while using pointers such that it feels like I've lost my
mind. [Baba Is You](https://hempuli.itch.io/baba) produces that same
feeling when it requires "a complex form of doubly-indirected
thinking" to solve.

It doesn't start out that way, of course. Like all great puzzle games,
Baba Is You introduces ideas incrementally. The goal of every puzzle
is to move to the winning item. For instance, this puzzle requires you
to move Baba (the rabbit-type creature) onto the flag in order to win.

![Baba is easy](/images/baba_is_easy.png)

The text forms the rules of the game:

1. `BABA IS YOU`
2. `FLAG IS WIN`

Every level has to have an `X IS YOU` rule or there would be nothing
to control and nothing to claim the win. The other rule you need is an
`X IS WIN` rule, but that's not always set to start the puzzle. In
this puzzle, all you have to do is step on the flag to win. Each word
in the rules can be pushed around so sometimes a puzzle will have an
incomplete win rule that you will need to assemble before you can win.

By the way, I created the puzzles I'm showing and you can play them if
you download the [Baba Is You level
editor](https://hempuli.itch.io/baba-is-you-level-editor-beta) and
enter the code I provide. This trivial level is `ZYXN-3PGU`.

Puzzles frequently use rules malleability. Even this easy puzzle is
trickier than it first appears. If the player presses the down arrow
to go down, they will push the word `BABA` out of the first
rule. Since there is no longer a rule defining the player and since a
player is always needed to complete the puzzle, the game instantly
stops. You can only resume the puzzle by resetting it (with the R key)
or undoing the most recent move (Z). Expect to use these keys
regularly.

Here's a trickier puzzle (`QBLG-EBCC`):

![Baba is pointer](/images/baba_is_pointer.png)

It has the same two rules, but there doesn't seem to be a way to win
since I didn't provide a flag. The level isn't that hard to solve with
a little trial and error. (Again, you can play it with the level
editor.) How would you approach this problem? I'll let you ponder a
solution while I explain another aspect of the game.

Pushing the text blocks around was inspired by another [puzzle game
called Sokoban](https://sokoban.info/), which is Japanese for
"warehouse keeper". It's about a awkwardly designed warehouse that's
too cheap to give workers a forklift. So they have to move boxes by
pushing them. The catch is you can get boxes stuck if you push them
into a corner or along a wall with no door. It's a somewhat tedious
game. Most levels involve a little trick to make space and then a
bunch of repetitive maneuvering to get each box in its place.

Baba Is You suffers this problem occasionally, but most levels can be
solved in less than a minute once you know the secret. The rich
variety of possible rules helps. Some levels are box-pushing puzzles,
but there are plenty of other mechanisms to play with. Baba moves
through themed sections of the world: lake, island, forest, space,
volcano, etc. Each subworld introduces new concepts and typically has
sections dedicated to specific ideas. New subworlds are opened up once
you complete a specified number of levels.

There aren't any Sokoban levels in the game itself, but I was able to
approximate[^2] one (`CKNB-BV1G`) with some of the more advanced
rules. (It's wonderful to have a level editor to help understand how
the game functions. It even hides "spoiler" words behind a setting so
that you can be surprised in the actual game.) What's notable about
this level is that none of the rules can be altered. Official levels
always allow at least some rules to be altered, which is the charm
(and challenge) of the game.

![An attempt to translate a Sokoban level in Baba Is You.](/images/baba_is_sokoban.png)

The Sokoban ruleset is about twice as long as the typical puzzle has
at the start. Then again, it's likely you'll need to recombine the
rules several times to reach the win condition. Sometimes you'll find
yourself animating one object after another by changing the `X IS YOU`
rule. Other times you'll rotate attributes, such as `PUSH` from one
object to the next as needed. The only real limitation is access to
the right word needed to create the rules.

Have you solved my puzzle? The answer is that Baba can also be the win
condition. Here's an image showing how I will win by pushing the `WIN`
text to the left:

![I'm about to solve the Baba is pointer level I made.](/images/baba_is_pointer_solved.png)

Since the player's avatar and the win condition are in the same
location (because they are the same item), it's an instant
win. Strange, right? But not all that strange in the world of Baba Is
You. Moving the rules around causes the changes in the level in ways
that often feel strange or wrong. And yet, they are always
logical. The game never cheats even though it seems like cheating to
do things like making your avatar the win condition.

I can't recommend the game enough. If you aren't sure you will enjoy
it, I recommend trying out the [original
prototype](https://hempuli.itch.io/baba-is-you) which includes the
first few levels of the final product. Even though I've played these
levels in the past, I still enjoy playing them again to find alternate
(and likely unplanned) solutions. It's an incredibly clever puzzle
system with a generous supply of levels.

I did find a few levels too hard to solve on my own. Sometimes putting
away the game and coming back after a night's sleep did the trick. But
when I get impatient, I turn to [Baba Is
Hint](https://www.keyofw.com/baba-is-hint) an unofficial guide that
give gentle (and not so gentle) nudges rather than simply providing
the solution. I still haven't finished all the levels because I'm
savoring them. 


---

Footnote:

[^1]: It was a variation of ["Hello
    World!"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%22Hello,_World!%22_program#C)
    where I was trying to make the output a variable. Strings in C are
    null-terminated character arrays that are manipulated using
    pointers. If you forget (or don't know) to initialize the pointer
    you want to use for holding strings, it will point to some random
    point in memory. It _could_ be a somewhere that's not used by
    anything. Or it could be somewhere important and putting something
    in that location could cause serious problems. Since the code of
    the program itself is stored in memory, you might even overwrite
    part of the program with nonsense.

    Uninitialized pointers are a common source of [heisenbugs](https://wiki.c2.com/?HeisenBug). 
    In this case, my program started working as soon as I added a statement 
    to print the value of the string. Most likely the new line of code 
    moved the random location my pointer referenced from somewhere dangerous to 
    a safe location.

[^2]: I think I accounted for everything. Each time I thought I'd hit
    a limit of the ruleset, I discovered a way implment a rule in a
    way that's not immediately obvious. The rules I came up with
    should work for other Sokoban puzzles:
    
    ```
    TILE WITHOUT BOX IS WIN
    BOX ON TRACK IS CART
    CART ON TILE IS BOX
    BOX NEAR ROBOT IS PUSH
    CART NEAR ROBOT IS PUSH
    WALL IS STOP
    BOX IS STOP
    CART IS STOP
    ROBOT IS YOU
    ```
    
    I also made the tracks and carts red to reflect the way crates in the 
    final locations are signified in the classic Sokoban game. It makes 
    sense to me that boxes are loaded ont carts at these locations
    rather than just changing colors. That also made the rules work, which
    is a nice bonus.
