---
layout: post
title: Review of _Unacceptable_
tags: community
---

You've probably heard of the ["Operation Varsity Blues"
investigation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2019_college_admissions_bribery_scandal)
which resulted in rich and famous people like Lori Loughlin, Felicity
Huffman and the Mossimo guy going to prison. Turns out paying bribes
to guarantee admission for their children into prestigious schools is
just a bit illegal. <a
href="https://www.amazon.com/Unacceptable-Privilege-College-Admissions-Scandal-ebook/dp/B085XK4KFH/ref=as_li_ss_il?crid=GAOJG8X32KAJ&dchild=1&keywords=unacceptable&qid=1604341788&sprefix=unacceptab,aps,261&sr=8-1&linkCode=li2&tag=jericson-20&linkId=09e258d6d241dd8eae86ff51a554fc83&language=en_US">_Unacceptable:
Privilege, Deceit & the Making of the College Admissions Scandal_</a>
by Melissa Korn and Jennifer Levitz goes beyond the headlines to
report how these affluent parents found themselves serving federal
time.

 
The book revolves around William Rick Singer's schemes to sneak
well-to-do students past the admission departments of elite
universities such as UCLA and USC. The college consultant described
three ways to be admitted to a highly selective school:

* the **front door** in which you submit your application and hope you
  get in.
* the **back door** in which you (or rather, your parents) donate a
  ton of money and hope you get a second look.
* the **side door**.

I should point out that I was admitted to UCLA via the "front door" as
was my wife and a number of our friends. Meanwhile, USC has long been
known as the "University of Spoiled Children" because of its
reputation as a school for rich students who get in via the "back
door". But "side door" schemes don't fit the stereotypes. All they
require is that the school be desirable enough for people who have the
money to find the cracks in the process.

One side door is athletics. Big-time sports like football and
basketball bring in plenty of money, but smaller sports like tennis,
rowing, soccer, sailing, water polo and volleyball struggle to get
funding. Schools with [decentralized
finances](https://academicsenate.usc.edu/uscs-revenue-center-management-system-how-the-money-flows/)
create incentives for coaches to raise funds for their sports. Thanks
to [Title
IX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Title_IX#Equity_in_athletics)
schools are required to give female athletes opportunities to
participate, but women's sports tend to not be as profitable as men's
basketball and football. So there's the motive.

Coaches also have the means to get students admitted without going
through the rigorous process non-athletes must navigate. The reason is
that schools want their sports programs to be competitive (if only as
a recruiting tool) so they give coaches autonomy in who they
recruit. While there might still be an academic achievement bar to
clear, sports recruits don't compete with the general population for
admission. If the crew coach says he wants to bring in a student to be
a cox on the women's eight, he can flag her without worrying about the
admissions office asking a lot of questions.

You might have already spotted a catch in the plan: what happens when
these recruits turn up for practice and can't actually play the sport
they were recruited for? It would be awkward for scholarship athletes,
but remember that these students don't need help paying for
school.[^1] They are walk-ons who need never walk onto the field,
court or pool.[^2] If anyone asks, they can always claim to be
injured.

To keep admissions offices in the dark, Singer's team created fake
athletic resumes for their clients. For instance, [a non-sailor was
awarded invented sailing
accomplishments](https://www.stanforddaily.com/2019/04/07/stanford-expels-student-admitted-with-falsified-sailing-credentials/)
in order to get admitted to Stanford.  According to the authors of
_Unacceptable_, some of the teens had photo sessions pretending to
play, say, water polo in the backyard infinity pool. In other cases,
[photos were simply taken off the
internet](https://www.espn.com/college-sports/story/_/id/26267149/pole-vaulter-amused-pic-used-admission-scam)
and doctored. It seems possible some of these students didn't even
know their parents had conspired with Singer to manufacture a fake
athletic past.[^3]

Another "side door" was straight up cheating on SAT and ACT admissions
tests. In the beginning, the scheme was to have someone else show up
to the testing center. But [a separate
scandal](https://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/02/education/on-long-island-sat-cheating-was-hardly-a-secret.html)
made that scheme harder to pull off. That didn't stop Singer. As a
workaround, he found two exam administrators (one in Houston and the
other in southern California) who were willing to be bribed to turn a
blind eye to cheating. In some cases, Singer's ringer, Mark Riddell,
fed answers to the test takers. In other cases, Riddell simply
corrected wrong answers with an eraser and #2 pencil after the test
was done. According to the authors, some parents didn't want their
children to know their scores had been faked since that would hurt the
student's self confidence.

I took my SAT at my own high school and I was assigned a testing
location for the ACT, since my school didn't offer that test. So how
could Singer's clients use his fraudulent test stations? Turns out
students with diagnosed learning disabilities can obtain special
accommodations for standardized tests, including extra time, private
sessions _and_ flexibility of test location. As long as the parents
can concoct a reason (wedding or bar mitzvah, for instance) their
child would be allowed to take the test at the site of their
choosing.[^4] Best of all, [since
2003](https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/education/abuse-of-extended-time-on-sat-and-act-outrages-learning-disability-community/2019/03/29/d58de3c6-4c1f-11e9-9663-00ac73f49662_story.html)
colleges aren't notified that these accommodations have been granted.

But what if the student doesn't have a learning disability? That's the
easiest (and cheapest) part of the operation. If you know the right
psychologist, you can get a (fake) diagnosis for a few thousand
dollars. Students with real learning disabilities usually need to get
help from their school to obtain these accommodations and there's no
guarantee via that path.

And a guarantee seems to be the point. These incredibly rich parents
are used to just paying money to get what they want. And what they
want, if _Unacceptable_ is accurate, is to tell their friends their
children go to a brand name school. It's a mindset that doesn't
understand the stress and uncertainty of the traditional college
admission process. Even donating a bunch of money directly to a school
can't ensure their children will be admitted (though it does help, of
course).

Perhaps just as important, these parents didn't want their friends and
children knowing about the influence they had. Reportedly one parent
was angry to learn his child had become suspicious about the test
scheme. Unlike making a large donation to get a building named after
them (with an understanding it would help in the admission process)
these parents "donated" money in less public ways.[^5] Maintaining the
illusion of raising high-achieving children was worth the price.

At the highest levels, the admissions system thrives on
uncertainty. You can read about it every day on [College
Confidential's Chance Me
forum](https://talk.collegeconfidential.com/what-my-chances/).[^6]
Students (or parents worried about their students) want to know if a
bad grade or a less-than-perfect test score will block them from being
admitted to the school they've set their heart on. They want to know
if their extra circulars help. Does being a competitive fencer help if
the school doesn't have a fencing program? Should I retake the SAT one
more time?

_Unacceptable_ does a good job explaining the various schemes and how
the government built its case. It also delves into the lives of
hard-working athletes whose images were stolen, but didn't get into
these elite schools themselves. It's a striking contrast to the
spoiled children who can't get motivated to pretend to play the sport
that helped them get admitted. Still, I'm not sure that's the crux of
the problem.

For all the importance people place on what schools students can get
into, we seem to be missing the fundamental purpose of higher
education. Under all of the pomp and circumstance, college is a rite
of passage. It is the way teenagers journey to adulthood. For the rich
and/or famous people who paid for their children to enter through the
side door, college admission had been transmogrified into a
certificate of parental excellence.

The striking thing about the figures in _Unacceptable_ is the lengths
they go to preserving their image without ever (apparently) examining
the person behind it. I stopped being surprised at their hubris or
appalled at their lies. In the end, I just felt pity for parents who
don't have the courage to let their children succeed (or fail) on
their own. Going to college is supposed to be about forging your own
path, but how can that happen when your parents won't let you taste
disappointment? To quote
[G. K. Chesterton](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1717/1717-h/1717-h.htm#link2H_4_0006)
out of context:

> The [parenting] ideal has not been tried and found wanting. It has
> been found difficult; and left untried

<!--One of the ways schools are evaluated is their acceptance rate. [USC
admits just
11%](https://www.collegeconfidential.com/schools/school/university-of-southern-california/admissions). UCLA?
[12%](https://www.collegeconfidential.com/schools/school/university-of-california-los-angeles/admissions).
Ivy League schools admit 5-8%. Obviously top students have their
choice of schools, but everyone else is worried they will have to
settle for a safety school.[^7] And the worry is compounded by the
perception that the school a young person attends set their life on a
path toward success or failure. So with limited number of
opportunities to attend Stanford, it's no wonder there will be
increasing demand for admission slots. And economics tells us the
inevitable result (absent regulation): increasing prices.

A lot of popular outrage comes, I suspect, from a sense of unfairness
given that children of celebrities will be fine no matter what school
they attend. But most students can't afford certainty and everything
related to college admissions is shrouded in mystery. Not even the
price is clearly explained given the complexity of financial aid.

-->

---

Footnotes:

[^1]: I did find [one student who recieved a
    scholarship](https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2019-08-18/college-admissions-scandal-ucla-rick-singer). He
    was Canadian and therefore would have paid much higher tuition
    than California students. But the scholarship only covered a
    quarter of the tuition according to the LA Times.

[^2]: Allusion to Jesus noted.

[^3]: Others, however, [most definitely
    did](https://www.cracked.com/article_27445_lori-laughlins-daughters-fake-rowing-photos-finally-went-public.html).

[^4]: In one case, a student innocently mentioned being able to take
    the ACT at home because he was sick. That _isn't_ allowed, so it
    raised the suspicions of other parents and a rival college
    coach. The whole thing was an elaborate cover to keep the child of
    the cheating parents from knowing the truth that Riddell was
    taking the real test for him in Houston.

[^5]: The money was still nominally a donation and parents even
    deducted the cost on their taxes. Whether they believed this was
    real or properly understood it was a bribe seems to vary by
    person.

[^6]: Full disclosure: I'm a Community Manager for College
    Confidential.
    
[^7]: There's a perncious feedback loop too. The more selective a
    school is, the more people will want to apply. 
