---
layout: post
title: How are minds changed?
tags: community
comments: yes
issue: 22
---

In the late eighties, there weren't as many games to play on a
computer as there are now. Unlike Nintendo, Atari and Sega, PC
platformers were rare and mostly bad. I played a bunch of text
adventures (and later point-and-click adventures), strange 2D
[battle](https://classicreload.com/res/scorched-earth.html) and
[flying](https://dosgames.com/game/sopwith/) games, and, of course,
joystick-controlled simulators.  Later, when Descent and other
[early shooters](https://www.gog.com/games/shooter?release=p2000&sort=popularity&page=1)
allowed movement in 3-dimensional space, I adapted the flight controls
to aim with a mouse. The first time someone handed me a dual-stick
controller, I kept flipping from floor to ceiling until I discovered
the option to invert the controls. No matter how long I try the
default control scheme, I can't get past decades of muscle memory.

Or at least I couldn't until suddenly, and for no discernible reason,
[my brain flipped](https://twitter.com/jlericson/status/966006592624672768). Now
if that were all, this story would not be elevated beyond a simple
curiosity. Fortunately, I have an idea of how it all happened and I
think it's a model of how minds are changed generally.

Most of the shooters I've played are first person representations. The
camera is stuck more or less in the same position your head would be
if you were in the game world. In truth, a better term would be a
"behind the gun" perspective, since most of what you see of your
character model is your own gun:

![First-person perspective](/images/Borderlands2_vista.png)

Looking at the world this way, aiming is a simple matter of pushing
the barrel of the gun up and down. It's not the only mental model, but
it's how I thought about it. Conveniently, the muscle memory matched
my flight simulator experience: push forward to pitch down and pull
back to pitch up. Instead of the nose of a fighter jet, I was steering
the tip of a rifle. Or even more naturally, the cross-hairs (which are
hard to see in this image) move in the same way that gun sights move
in [a WWII flight
sim](https://www.mobygames.com/game/battlehawks-1942).[^1]

In education theory terms, I
[assimilated](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piaget%27s_theory_of_cognitive_development#Assimilation_and_accommodation)
the new experience of aiming in first person to my existing model of
aiming with a joystick. Obviously, the developers abetted this
behavior by providing the option to invert the Y-axis.[^2] And they
have good reason for that: it's much easier for a programmer to add a
setting than it is for a player to adjust their mental model. Even
when the inverted-Y-axis population is small, not offering the option
costs potential revenue because it's not fun to fight with a game
needlessly.

Almost all learning we do after we've matured is simply assimilating
new data. This is true on an individual level, but also for entire
societies. Most divisions you see in people around you are the result
of divergent models of reality. Liberals and conservatives, religious
people and skeptics, just see the world differently. In extreme cases,
people develop [epistemic
closure](https://twitter.com/normative/status/1298738662532935681)
giving them a framework to reject foreign beliefs.

Just as my inverted Y-axis model was formed by the games I played at
an impressionable age, much of our models of the world get established
when our minds are new.[^3] This is why so many people acquire the
religious beliefs of their parents; those ideas become deeply
implanted when minds are young. The window for forming and altering
core beliefs starts to close in early adulthood.

At that point, the mind [builds defenses to protect core
beliefs](https://theoatmeal.com/comics/believe_clean) making it
extraordinarily difficult to change them. Not just difficult for
someone else to change our belief system, but nearly impossible for
_us to change our own minds_. One defense, the backfire effect, seems
to [act via emotional
response](https://blog.jeremysaid.com/the-backfire-effect-youre-right-to-get-emotional-about-this-cognitive-bias/),
but our brains employ a wide variety of cognitive walls to protect
core beliefs.

You might be thinking this is bad news, but consider how important
preserving core beliefs are! We spend decades acquiring them, so we
should be slow to abandon our central ideas. [Thomas
Kuhn](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/thomas-kuhn/) described the
difficulties of moving beyond Newtonian physics thusly:

> To make the transition to Einsteinâ€™s universe, the whole conceptual
> web whose strands are space, time, matter, force, and so on, had to
> be shifted and laid down again on nature whole.&mdash;_The Structure
> of Scientific Revolutions_ (p 149)

In fact we still teach Newtonian physics to most students because
relativity only matters in very specific situations humans rarely
experience. So when students take an advanced physics course, they
need to rebuild their "conceptual web" to account for oddities like
the [Twin
Paradox](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-does-relativity-theor/)
and [gravitational
lensing](https://www.science.org.au/curious/space-time/gravitational-lensing). Even
then, it's generally fine to revert to the previous paradigm once the
final is over.

So it's not always clear that changing your mind is necessary. We tend
to identify times when _other people_ need to change their minds.
Paradoxically, that often means there's something wrong with our own
way of thinking. A stark example is people who value diversity
insisting in the strongest terms that people they disagree with need
to change their opinions. I'm not saying their core beliefs are
wrong. (I often find myself agreeing, in fact). Rather there is an
inherent contradiction that ought to be examined with honesty.

At any rate, I started with a story about how I changed the way I
think about video game controls and it's about time I got to the
punchline. It happened while playing Assassin's Creed IV: Black
Flag. Ever since Sid Meier's Pirates![^4] I've had a soft spot for
pirate games. So I really wanted to play it. The trouble was, I didn't
know how to invert the mouse Y-axis.[^5] So I ended up playing the
entire tutorial and several missions using uncomfortable (for me)
controls.

![Third-person perspective](/images/Black_Flag_vista.jpg)

Now the Assassin's Creed games differ from many 3D games on the PC in
that they show the player character's body. This is usually called
"third person" because the player observes their avatar from
behind. Perhaps it made the transition to inverted controls slightly
easier since the mental model is less steering plane (or a gun) and
more controlling an independent camera.

But the reason I was able to adjust to a foreign control scheme was
simply that **I lived with it long enough to adjust**. I could have
given up on the game. I could have discovered the hidden option to
invert my mouse. But I didn't. I stuck with the uncomfortable feeling
long enough that I got used to it. And now I don't go out of my way to
invert controls. I don't have to.

I'm convinced that the reason we don't change our minds is that few of
us are willing to be uncomfortable for long. Not long ago, someone
challenged one of my assumptions about the world. My first instinct
was to disagree&mdash;violently. But it was late in the evening and I
slept on it. The next morning I decided to just ignore this person's
comment. But the longer time went on, the more I realized I might be
the one who was wrong. It distracted me from ordinary activities and I
wished it would just go away. Finally, I saw the other person's point
of view. I still don't agree&mdash;not fully. Letting myself sit in an
awkward mental state gave me the insight to be open to change.

We talk about "irreconcilable differences" and how other people are
too evil/ignorant/foolish to be trusted. Those are symptoms of our
unwillingness to care about others enough to inhabit their mind
space. Ultimately, if you value being open-minded, you either will be
frequently uncomfortable listening to others or you are a hypocrite.

---

Footnotes:

[^1]: Or [WWI](https://www.mobygames.com/game/red-baron), for that matter.

[^2]: Have you seen inverted X-axis options and wondered if the
    developers misunderstood the problem? Well, it turns out that
    [people really do invert the
    X-axis](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/comments/6u1m7q/inverted_horizontal_controls/).

[^3]: When is this? Well, it starts [before we are
    born](https://news.psu.edu/story/141254/2009/02/23/research/probing-question-can-babies-learn-utero)
    and continues [to
    adulthood](https://www.npr.org/sections/ed/2014/10/04/351187049/q-a-plumbing-the-mysteries-of-the-teenage-brain).

[^4]: The [1987
    version](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sid_Meier%27s_Pirates!). And
    yes, the exclamation point is part of the title and the game is
    good enough to deserve it.

[^5]: The option exists, but only [during a specific part of the 
    game](https://steamcommunity.com/app/15100/discussions/0/1483233503859505527/). 
    It's honestly baffling and shows the attitude a lot of console-centric developers 
    have toward inverted controls.

<!--  LocalWords:  platformers jpg LocalWords sim
 -->
