---
layout: post
title: "Review of _Dune: Part One_"
tags: review movie
comments: yes
image: /images/grand_canyon_dry.jpg
---

My first encounter with _Dune_ was reading the Frank Herbert novel in
high school. From there I read his _Dune_ sequels and some of his
other novels. (If you are curious, I quite liked _Destination: Void_,
_The Dosadi Experiment_ and _The White Plague_.) I even started one of
the _Dune_ sequels written by his son, which illustrates what rare
gifts his father possessed. The elder Herbert mastered the art of epic
mystery. He reveals just enough about the vast universe he's
constructed to make it believable without letting the reader suspect
that it's entirely imaginary.

To wit, the novel begins with a scene that could almost be a
stand-alone story in which Paul Atreides submits to a "test of
humanity". His mother, you see, is Bene Gesserit and was ordered to
produce only females. Her superior must determine if Paul is the
Kwisatz Haderach who can predict the future. The test consists of
placing his right hand in a box that contains pain while the Reverend
Mother holds a Gom Jabbar, a poisoned needle, to his neck. Lady
Jessica stands outside suffering for her son since she herself endured
the test as a child.

My summary fails to capture the verisimilitude of the
original. Walking the narrow path between faintly ridiculous and
impenetrably foreign is hard enough on paper. But putting this onto a
screen seems insurmountable. Indeed this very scene in David Lynch's
_Dune_ can only be understood by people who've already read the book
and _also_ comes perilously close to comedy.


<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/QrCfivcQe48" title="Dune (1984) - Gom Jabbar" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Now I seem to have enjoyed the 1984 adaptation better than
most. Still, it's not hard to see problems. [At the
time](https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/dune-1984), Roger Ebert
called the special effects "a throwback to Flash Gordon". It also
suffers from the Peter Jackson's _The Hobbit_ problem of tossing in
elements from the book that don't play well on the screen. And,
despite being a fine actor, the 25-year-old Kyle MacLachlan simply
could not pull off a 15-year-old Paul Atreides.

That's critical because _Dune_ tells a messianic coming-of-age
story. Perhaps the prototypical example comes from the gospel of Luke
in which a [12-year-old Jesus stayed in the
temple](https://www.desiringgod.org/messages/the-son-of-god-at-12-years-old)
rather than go back to Nazareth with his parents. More recently, we
have Harry Potter who tries to live an ordinary life (as a wizard)
while also being widely recognized a the chosen one. How can a
character destined for greatness grow over the course of a story
without it all seeming like artificial drama?

Denis Villeneuve, director of the new _Dune_, casts Timoth√©e Chalamet,
who is also 25, in the role of Paul. Worryingly, he comes off as a
brooding and entitled boy in [the
trailers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w0HgHet0sxg). Both Lynch and
Villeneuve push the humanity test scene from opening the story into a
transition to the second act. Lynch uses the very first shot of the
movie to explain the intricate plot. The new film prioritizes the
character of Paul. He spends an inordinate amount of time
dreaming. He's closer to his father's advisors than he is to Duke Leto
himself. And he's something of a mamma's boy, to be honest.

Quite a bit depends on the Gom Jabbar test. Done well and it propels
Paul's character into adulthood. Done poorly and it's just another
square filled on the fan bingo card. Clearly Denis Velleneuve agreed
as you can see in this video he did for Vanity Fair explaining what
went into making the scene.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/GoAA0sYkLI0" title="Dune (2021) - Denis Villeneuve discusses his Gom Jabbar scene" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

For me, it paid off. Rebecca Ferguson (as Lady Jessica) and Chalamet
anchor the film in a mother-son relationship. The last movie I saw
in the theater was _Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker_. It was a
spectacle that washed over me because I could not care about the
characters. _Dune_ takes the time to build characters so that the
cinematics produce meaning. Explosions only matter when I believe they
are dangerous to flesh and blood.

This version of _Dune_ brings the modern tools of movie making to
create an appropriate setting for a high-concept science fiction
story. It spans planets yet even the smallest detail has been
considered. For instance, artificial intelligence has been outlawed,
so when the Duke wants to know how much it cost for the emperor to
send a delegation to his planet, he asks his human computer, Thufir
Hawat (played by Stephen McKinley Henderson). His eyes roll back into
his head and a moment later he has an answer. It's a simple effect
(that almost certainly used non-human computers), but it's a detail
that solidifies the world.

While much of the grandeur of _Dune_ exists only in heavily processed
data, it's obvious many scenes were [filmed on
location](https://www.cntraveler.com/story/on-location-dune). _Dune_
the novel sketches out what it takes to live in a hostile desert
environment&mdash;especially the importance of preserving water to
preserve life. Among all the exotic trappings of the _Dune_ universe,
we can only directly experience the beauty and hazards of the
desert. (Well, a version of the desert lacking huge sand worms, of
course.)

![The Grand Canyon, which sorta looks like some of the scenes in Dune.](/images/grand_canyon_dry.jpg)

Since this version of _Dune_ draws out the relationship between Paul
and his mother, it leaves less room for other characters. Feyd-Rautha
(Sting's character in 1984), the emperor and his daughter do not
appear in this film, though they should have roles in _Part Two_. More
troubling are characters that don't survive the first movie: Duncan
Idaho, Dr. Wellington Yueh, Duke Leto, Piter de Vries, Shadout Mapes
and Dr. Liet Kynes. (Spoilers, I suppose.[^1]) Kynes' death is
especially frustrating as the character is played by Sharon
Duncan-Brewster, a black woman, rather than a man as portrayed in the
book. It was an interesting choice that could not be fully explored.

As I watched the first half or so, I felt the movie was paced
appropriately to fit in the scenes necessary to be a _Dune_
adaptation. When the focus shifted to Arrakis, the film began to crawl
as if walking through that planet's sandy surface. Action scenes
didn't hold my attention the way they were certainly intended. In
addition I reached a sort of world-building fatigue. Did we really
need a scene on the Sardaukar training planet? Or a demonstration of
drum sand? Or yet another dream sequence? Save these for the Blu-ray
extras or the sequel.

Epic films tend to cut a lot to fit into an acceptable run time and
_Dune_ is no exception. I absolutely enjoyed the spectacle and Hans
Zimmer's powerful, moody score. But my mind kept returning to the
question of "where will this story be cut?" Repeatedly I wondered if the
credits were about to roll and being, well, not disappointed, but held
in a sort of meta-suspense. The actual ending felt unresolved despite
the sequel-implying lampshade. On the way, it passed up at least two
better endings, in my opinion.[^2]

Perhaps it's unfair to judge what is certainly going to be an epic
film series in the mold of _The Lord of the Rings_ and _Star
Wars_. Still, each of those individual movies found ways to complete a
narrative arc while still holding other arcs in reserve. _Dune Part
Two_ will tell of a reluctant messiah who foresees the horrors of his
legacy. That might be difficult considering the need to show more sand
worms, Fremen culture, a romance subplot and, of course, political
intrigue.

It's more or less impossible for me to predict how people who haven't
read (and enjoyed) the novel. My guess would be this film doesn't
explain enough for people who haven't internalized the plot before
watching. For those of us who have anticipated an authentic _Dune_
movie made people who also enjoyed the book, Velleneuve accomplished
the impossible.

---

Footnotes:

[^1]: Even more of a spoiler: one of these isn't a spoiler in the end.

[^2]: #1 would be a Duncan Idaho cliffhanger. #2 leaves Jessica and
    Paul alone in the desert infested with sand worms.
