---
layout: post
title: 'Carcassonne: Bridges, Castles and Bazaars (Expansion 8)&mdash;Surprisingly subtle expansions'
tags: game review
---

[Originally published on Board Game
Geek.](https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2639728/surprisingly-subtle-expansions)

My kids have been getting into Carcassonne in a big way and they
noticed my one and only expansion on the shelf. (I've played other
expansions in the computer version, but <a
href="https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2435663/why-carcassonne-has-permanent-place-my-game-shelf">I
don't think any expansion is necessary</a> to the original game.)
Since Carcassonne expansions can be added piecemeal, we've started
playing with just one at a time to see how it works.
 
## Bridges 
 
We played an entire game with a grand total of one bridge played: 
 
![Completed Carcassonne game with a bridge](/images/carc_bridges.jpg)
 
The eagle-eyed in the audience will notice a mistake with a road tile
that dead-ends on an open field. This was the last tile played and it
helped one of my children get a slightly better score without changing
the outcome so I let it slide. (We also ignore the restrictions on the
river tiles designed to avoid getting stuck. It's fun to build big
bends and we feel free to change the flow of the river later if it
causes problems.)
 
This mistake helps illustrate the value and limitations of bridges. If
you have a tile that you really want to place somewhere but a road
edge is blocking you, a bridge might solve your problem. They can
either be built on the tile just placed or on an adjacent tile. The
key is that both ends of the bridge need a footing in a field edge. In
our case, the bridge would not help since the other end of the bridge
would have been on a city edge.
 
We didn't use many bridges because we didn't often feel the need to
place a tile where they would be needed. Intuitively bridges feel like
an expansion to the road mechanics. It's true a bridge can let you
claim a share in someone else's road, but their real value comes with
farmers. Unlike roads, bridges don't divide fields. A core strategy of
Carcassonne is finding ways to claim other people's territory by
adding just the right tile. Bridges allow that to happen in spots
where it would be impossible in the base game.
 
The one bridge I placed shows what I mean. When there are two tiles
with road ends facing each other, that normally signals the edge of
field since no tile can go in that spot without dividing the
field. But I was able to place a cloister surrounded by fields and
open up both sides to a farmer. (I didn't actually place any farmers
in this game because my kids didn't want to play with farmers this
time around. I, uh, often do quite well with farmers.)
 
I like bridges because they open up more strategies to claim longer
roads and bigger fields. They also make "boring" road tiles a bit more
interesting to play. I also enjoy fiddling with the bridges as they
sit in my supply.
 
## Castles 
 
We placed a bunch of castles when we played with them. We also used
farmers who took advantage of the castle bonuses.
 
![Completed Carcassonne layout with castles](/images/carc_castles.jpg)
 
Castles work as an investment mechanism. You can take the 4 points
when you build a football (American) town or place a castle that will
potentially reward you a bigger point total. On the left side of the
image, there are three castles in a group. My son scored one of the
castles by completing the huge 26-point city. He immediately gained 52
points with a single play. The other two castles were built later and
the game ended without them scoring. So that's the risk and reward
potential.
 
When a castle goes down, it's often in other players' best interest to
complete some other feature (like a short road) so the castle doesn't
get a huge payout. And since castles are even more valuable than small
cities when farmers are scored, they also focus attention on
surrounding fields. (This time my kids wanted to play with farmers so
I experienced this directly.) As a result, castles focus attention on
one portion of the board in a way that other features (in the base
game) do not. Castles demand immediate attention.
 
I've always liked two-tile cities as a way to score a quick 4 points
without tying up a meeple. That's still possible, but castles strongly
encourage a longer-term investment. For me, this is an ideal expansion
that adds more decision points without increasing the complexity or
altering the game too much.
 
## Bazaars 
 
I don't have an image to show here because we haven't actually played
this portion of the expansion. My excuse is the auction rules are
fairly complicated for younger children. We probably should try the
bazaar variant that just has players select from turned up tiles
rather than bidding. It has the odd effect of sticking the player who
turned up the bazaar with the least desired tile rather than giving
them the final bid.
 
I'm a little hesitant to pass judgment on this portion of the
expansion without playing it because I found the other two parts more
interesting on the table than on paper. That said, it seems like
bidding for tiles very much depends on whether a particularly valuable
tile turns up. It could very well be worth a lot of points to get the
one tile needed to complete a large city, which would make for a taut
auction. (This is especially true if someone stands to claim those
points with a castle!)
 
When there aren't standout tiles, auctions seem like a disruptive
mini-game. Certainly the existence of <a
href="https://boardgamegeek.com/forum/729550/carcassonne-expansion-8-bridges-castles-and-bazaar/variants">several
bazaar variants</a> suggests players are not satisfied with the
official rules.
 
One thing to note is that if nobody cares strongly about getting one
tile, everyone can bid 0 points. That defaults to picking tiles in
turn as in the official variant. So it could simplify the process to
decide after turning up the tiles whether anyone cares enough to go
through the auction process. Again, I haven't played with bazaars
myself.
 
## Summary 
 
None of the bits of this expansion seem vital. Castles come the
closest since they take what is usually an obvious play and make the
decision harder. The bazaar tiles could be added to any game without
needing to include the auction mechanic. They just make the resulting
map a little more varied. When we played without bridges we did notice
more times when they would be useful. I suppose we need more practice
using them. Next time I'd like to try the simple bazaar variant, but
auctions seem like they would break the flow of the game too much.
 
On the whole, I'm glad we finally tried this expansion, but the base
game will probably continue to get played most often at our house.
