---
layout: post
title: 'Sushi Go!'
subtitle: Lowering the barrier for drafting games
comments: yes
tags: game review
---

Originally [conveyor belt
sushi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conveyor_belt_sushi) solved a
staffing problem. It replaced human servers with a never-ending train
of self-serve dishes. The system also lowers the barrier to sampling
what can be an exotic delicacy. No need to struggle with a name or
make guesses about what you are ordering. If something looks good,
just pluck it from the conveyor.

Similarly [Sushi
Go!](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/133473/sushi-go) introduces
card drafting to an audience that might not have tried it
otherwise. You start with a hand of cards (ranging from 7 for a
five-player game to 10 for two players) and select one card to
play. When each player has chosen a card, everyone reveals their card
at the same time and passes their hand around the circle. When all the
cards have been played, score up the value of the cards you've
played. After three rounds, the player with the highest score
wins. That's more or less the game.


![Sushi Go in my Quiver case to go.](/images/sushi_to_go.jpg)

_I've put Sushi Go in my [Quiver card
case](https://quivertime.com/card-cases/quiver-card-case/). The metal
box tends to lose it's lid and I like having a copy with me when I
travel._

The genius of the Sushi Go comes from the various card types and how
they score. Tempura only score in pairs. If you only collect one, you
don't get anything. If you have two, that earns you 5 points. Sashimi
works the same way except you need three to score 10. Dumplings score
just one if you have only one, but increase in value as you grab
more. Maki rolls only score if you have the most or the second most
number of rolls printed on your cards.

It won't be obvious until you start playing, but the variety of
combinations means you always have tough choices. Tempura will usually
be a safe bet, but once you pick one, there's pressure to grab the
second if you see one. Sashimi creates even more pressure since you
need three. Collecting maki rolls stops making sense once you have
claimed the majority, but maybe the hands you haven't seen have enough
for someone to catch up? If someone else starts picking dumplings, it
might be best to take some so they can't run up a high score.

And then there is the wasabi/nigiri combination. There are three types
of nigiri (egg, salmon and squid) worth 1, 2 or 3 points. But if you
play wasabi and _then_ nigiri, the score is tripled. Wasabi without
nigiri is worth nothing. That means wasabi has the potential to
combine with squid nigiri for 9 points. Or you might not get anything
if everyone else takes all the nigiri before you get a chance. As a
result, there are times you might want to take nigiri knowing that the
next player down the line will put it on their wasabi if you don't.

Experienced drafters will recognize this as an example of "hate
drafting". Only there's not the bad feeling often associated with the
term. For one thing, the cartoon sushi just look so darn happy. But
more relevant, taking nigiri gives 1-3 points to the person who takes
it, so it's not _just_ hate drafting. Toward the end on the round, you
might find yourself choosing between several cards that have no value
for you, but do prevent the next person from scoring. Technically
that's hate drafting too, but it doesn't feel malicious because what
else can you do?

Chopsticks cards allow you to swap them with a second card from a
later hand. If you get stuck with them during scoring they have no
value. Obviously they are best obtained early if at all. Holding them
means the person giving you cards must be careful not to pass on easy
points. Normally it doesn't matter if you pass a tempura pair, for
instance, because without chopsticks only one can be picked. It's an
interesting change of pace.

It's a bit odd to think of chopsticks from a thematic
perspective. Wouldn't everyone start with them on your table? How do
they help you grab an extra item later? Are you returning _used_
chopstick? Perhaps it's best not to think on it.

Puddings, however, fit so well. As they are desserts, they don't score
until the very end of the game. When the three rounds are over, the
people who collected the most puddings split 6 points and the people
who have the least puddings split a 6 point penalty. So it's important
to keep pace with other players when it comes to puddings. But it
comes at the cost of not taking cards that will score points in the
current round. 

Sushi Go can be played by almost anyone. All you gotta do is take a
card. I've noticed that younger players might go after a goal (often
maki rolls) without understanding that other cards will help them
score more points. That's part of learning how to play _well_ and not
just how to play. In the meantime, it's satisfying to achieve that
goal and randomness means they might get a decent score anyway. 

It's sometimes easy to dismiss simple games like [Lost
Cities](https://jlericson.com/2021/12/07/lost_cities.html) and Sushi
Go. After playing a few times, it feels like there's not much more to
learn. Since the rules are so sparse, it can feel like the theme could
be almost anything. A bit of luck seems to matter more than
skill. Besides, it's just one mechanism and doesn't that get old
quickly?

And yet, new possibilities emerge the more times you play. By
remembering the cards you've seen, watching what other people have
played and knowing the distribution of cards in the deck, you can gain
an edge by drafting higher-value cards. In that way, Sushi Go requires
skills not dissimilar from the foundational skill in poker.

Everything, from the theme to the art to the distribution of the cards
to the details of how they are scored, about Sushi Go works. Yes, it's
a light family game. But it also provides an interesting challenge for
the most experienced players. 

Also published on [Board Game
Geek](https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2923149/article/40684872#40684872).

<!--  LocalWords:  nigiri sashimi maki
 -->
