---
layout: post
title: Community as meta-product
tags: community
comments: yes
---

I started [a small online community
consultancy](https://buildcivitas.com/building-civitas/) and it's been
a rough go, if I'm honest. Because we are increasingly interacting
with each other virtually, a trend which was accelerated by a
pandemic, "community" has become something every company believes they
need. That's good for business, right? Not the way I do business, I'm
afraid.

The conversation goes something like this:

**Potential client**: We need a community!

**Me**: Why? It's very difficult to start a new community from
scratch. And even after doing the work to get started, there's no
guarantee it'll thrive. And even if it grows in a healthy way,
mostlikely it won't help your business grow.

**Potential client**: Uh. Ok... Don't call us; we'll call you.

The way I look at it, communities [require considerable investment
because they store considerable
value](https://jlericson.com/2021/03/23/2021_CMX_report.html). If it
were easy, every company would have healthy and productive
communities. It's not the sort of thing to do on a whim or because
it's trendy. If I'm going to help create a community, I must know that
the company will support it for the long haul.

![Large stack of various flavors at the Jelly Belly
factory.](/images/jelly_belly_crates.jpg)

I'm fascinated with [Conway's
law](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_law), which asserts a
correspondence between an organization's internal structure and what
it produces. One formulation comes from [Conway's original
paper](http://www.melconway.com/Home/Committees_Paper.html):

> To the extent that an organization is not completely flexible in its
> communication structure, that organization will stamp out an image
> of itself in every design it produces. The larger an organization
> is, the less flexibility it has and the more pronounced is the
> phenomenon.&mdash;Melvin E. Conway

I saw this pretty directly at Stack Overflow. Before I joined, the
company was very flexible in how it communicated. They weren't divided
into departments because everyone picked up whatever was most urgent
and important that needed doing. If that meant a developer answering
support tickets or an executive assistant hanging curtains, so be
it. As the company grew, people [gave up their
Legos](https://review.firstround.com/give-away-your-legos-and-other-commandments-for-scaling-startups)
and specialized.

By the time I'd joined, the company was pretty well divided into
departments. When I first visited the New York office, I was warned
not to interrupt the salespeople because they were busy making
money. Sales worked in a huge open office plan even though our CEO was
[known as a proponent of private
offices](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2006/07/30/private-offices-redux/). A
few years later, I was invited to give a crash course to new
salespeople so that they would understand Stack Overflow and be better
at selling it. We had fun, but I suspect it didn't help because they
were selling a product that was largely disconnected from the Stack
Overflow community.

Confusingly, the product they sold was branded as Stack Overflow, but
it was created by people who weren't directly involved in the Stack
Overflow site for programming questions. The job site called Stack
Overflow Talent had a little blue box[^1] in the sidebar of the main
Stack Overflow site and that was pretty much the extent of how the
two Stack Overflows were connected. It wasn't until years later that
[Stack Overflow sold something that resembles Stack
Overflow](https://stackoverflow.blog/2018/05/23/how-stack-overflow-for-teams-fits-into-the-community/
). Having completely separate products was (depending on your
interpretation of Conway's Law) a consequence or cause of the
divisions in the company.

![Workers at the Jelly Belly factory mixing flavors.](/images/jelly_belly_mixing.jpg)

When I talk to potential clients, the conversation starts with the
CEO/founder. But our primary contact person inevitably turns out to be
someone in marketing. The idea seems to be that an online community
is a proprietary social media site and marketing is usually
responsible for social media campaigns. It's an understandable
attitude, but remember Conway's law. A community started by marketing
will never become more than an outlet for marketing.

I recently gave a presentation to our Chief Marketing Officer at
EDB. I highlighted the role of documentation during the sales
process. To sum up, documentation, if it is to be useful for
developers, reflects the reality of our products, warts and all. As a
result, savvy buyers of software products consult documentation as a
part of their purchasing decisions. Documentation doesn't lie.

We have some control over how our documentation is designed and it
might be tempting to smooth off rough edges. But that effort is doomed
to futility because our documentation needs to be accurate if we want
developers to be successful. We'll have a much harder time getting
customers to renew if they don't actually use our products. Only by
fixing the underlying product can we hope to show our best face to the
world.

In the same way, a community works more like a mirror than a
megaphone. If your product inspires passion in users, they will talk
about it somewhere. You can suppress negative chatter in a community
you control, but that just means people will talk about it in some
other forum. Better to think of your community as a standing research
panel rather than an audience for your marketing message.

[![Ronald Reagan grabbing a handful or Jelly
Bellies.](https://www.reaganlibrary.gov/public/styles/large/public/inline-images/oMubemlgcaHjQbBSkV1tk2mQA2dv1sfqOooULAdJWFcbDDkHgI.jpg?itok=FvlLzbVC)](https://www.reaganlibrary.gov/reagans/ronald-reagan/jelly-bellyr-jelly-beans-and-ronald-reagan)

In 1966, Ronald Reagan (then known as an moderately successful actor)
ran for Governor of California. About the same time he decided to quit
smoking and took up eating jelly beans instead. At a campaign event,
fellow candy enthusiast Russ Albers ([inducted in the Candy Hall of
Fame](https://candyhalloffame.org/inductee/russell-d-albers/))
introduced Reagan to a brand of smaller and more flavorful jelly
beans. For the rest of his life, Reagan was a devoted fan of Jelly
Belly jelly beans. That's the sort of publicity money can't buy.[^2]

The true value of a community is relationships. You just never know
when a Russ Albers will introduce the future president of the United
States to your product. A community creates thousands of authentic
connections between people that creates trust and opportunity. A
well-managed community produces passionate users and honest feedback
that just can't be purchased.

In an ideal world, everyone in a company would have their [ears to the
ground](https://steve-yegge.medium.com/why-i-left-google-to-join-grab-86dfffc0be84)
listening to customers. But nowhere is that more important than the
people who make the product that's being sold. How often do you see
companies selling [solutions to problems nobody in the history of the
world has ever
had](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2000/09/12/wasting-money-on-cats/)?
That doesn't happen if product development is listening to customers.

![More Jelly Bellies in front of a US flag](/images/jelly_belly_flag.jpg)

As a [developer
advocate](https://jlericson.com/2021/04/30/developer_advocate.html), I
spend approximately 0 effort convincing developers to use EDB's
products. Instead the job is cultivating an environment where
developers can be successful using our products. We are immeasurably
aided by the [PostgreSQL
community](https://www.postgresql.org/community/), which supports each
other when it comes to the open-source software our products are built
on. Database software is incredibly complicated. Since [it's
beginnings](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/history.html) as
research project, the community has made it possible for [almost
anyone to use Postgres
productively](https://jlericson.com/2021/05/14/install_pg.html).

Fundamentally, people derive joy from helping others. It's [why people
answer questions for no
compensation](https://jlericson.com/2016/07/13/QA_economics.html) and
how you can visit a foreign country without a guidebook.[^3]
Communities that tap into that fundamental desire provide value to
companies that happen to be in the same ecosystem. Unfortunately, that
benefit can be difficult to measure directly.

Ideally, I'd like to work with companies that start a community as
long-term project with no particular promise of resulting in
sales. But I can see how that might look like I'm selling snake oil
where the benefit comes _any day now_. So my second favorite mode of
community is as a place where customers can support each other (with
input from the company's employees). It's especially useful if the
community informs the development of the company's products.

For most companies, the community isn't the product. But it can be a
place for people (including employees) to have authentic conversations
about whatever the company is selling.

---

Footnotes:

[^1]: Fellow employees will recall another adjective used in place of
    "little".
    
[^2]: All the pictures on this page besides the one of the Gipper,
    were from when our family visited the Jelly Belly factory _and
    paid to go on a tour_. We're not in an online Jelly Belly
    community or whatever, but the company has created a sort of
    fandom that gets people excited about their brand.

[^3]: Unfortunately, there are also people who like to cause trouble
    and those people make it harder to trust answers on the internet
    or directions on the street. This is were community management
    steps in.
