---
layout: post
title: Why conflict is inevitable
tags: community
comments: true
---

I've worked with [many
communities](https://stackexchange.com/sites#oldest) and without
exception there has been conflict on every one. You _might_ think
there'd be more conflict in a group about
[parenting](https://parenting.stackexchange.com/) than one about, oh,
[science fiction & fantasy](https://scifi.stackexchange.com/), but
you'd be wrong. I mean, there's a lot of conflict on Parenting. It's
just perplexing that there are so many fights about literal fiction.

[![Surrealist sword battle between peace signs](/images/peace_battle.png)](https://labs.openai.com/s/1es4eVMHMkipyoUksS7XPsLU)

At a base level, people come into conflict when they care about
something they share, but don't agree on some aspect of that
thing. People care about how to raise children and they also care
about fictional stories. Often conflict comes from differences in what
people value about those topics. So parents might disagree about
[whether homeschooling is a good
idea](https://parenting.stackexchange.com/questions/19106/is-non-professional-homeschooling-detrimental-to-children)
and sci-fi[^1] nerds disagree about [whether a Terminator is stronger
than an
elephant](https://scifi.stackexchange.com/questions/63910/how-strong-are-terminators).

Laugh if you like, but the difference between these concerns aren't
frivolous. While there isn't a practical purpose to the [Terminator
vs. Elephant
question](https://scifi.meta.stackexchange.com/questions/4835/does-elephant-vs-terminator-gorilla-vs-shark),
most people don't genuinely need an answer to the home-school question
either. They want to know how judgmental/superior they should feel
about their neighbors. Quite often the value of a topic comes from
somewhere inside a person rather than some external place. Fiction
speaks to us in mysterious ways.

There are many [strategies to dealing with
conflict](https://www.valamis.com/hub/conflict-management-styles):

* Accommodating
* Avoiding
* Compromising
* Competing
* Collaboration

I've run into a strategy recently that isn't on that list. I call it
Exclusion. The idea is that if someone in a group disagrees, the group
will be more unified if that person leaves. It's a straightforward way
to end conflict and it just works&mdash;temporarily. Somehow each time
a group gets rid of one problem, a new disagreement pops up. It's
strange because if these people aren't happy with the group, why don't
they stick around?

Exclusion doesn't work in the long run because there's always another
layer of disagreement. That's not to say there aren't toxic people who
really should be excluded from a group. Rather people who disagree
most might not be the most toxic people in a group. Subtly, groups
change over time and that means there are always new friction between
people. If a group settles on exclusion for managing conflict, it
won't be a growing group.

Truth is, the only groups that don't have conflict are those that are
too young or insignificant. Since conflict happens when people care
about something (other wise they don't bother to push disagreements),
conflict is a sign of maturity and significance. It's the symptom and
result of people working together on a common goal. 

It is possible to drive conflict underground with authoritarianism or
a culture of surface unity. That's a vital part of how a military
function. Most people don't want to kill other people, so discipline
and commitment to a higher authority must be enforced. You better
believe the conflict is still there, though. It's just expressed in
ways that are compatible with a culture of discipline.

Ultimate conflict is healthy for a group. The people who care about it
aren't satisfied with the _stratus quo_ because every group could
stand to be improved. If a group were to somehow obtain
perfection,[^2] I suppose it wouldn't have conflict and wouldn't need
it. But until then, it's better to find ways to manage conflict rather
than dismiss or hide it.

---

[^1]: They also disagree about whether it should be [science fiction,
     sci-fi, SF or speculative
     fiction](https://damiengwalter.com/2018/08/07/science-fiction-vs-scifi-vs-sf-what-is-the-true-definition/).

[^2]: As a Christian, I believe the church will be perfect _after the
    end of this broken world_. But never make the mistake it's perfect
    now!
