---
layout: post
title: Nusfjord
subtitle: 
tags: game review
comments: true
---

My grandparents lived up on the Washington side of the mouth of the
Columbia river. Along the coast fishing spawned dozens of little
towns. These days the industry has dried up, so to speak, and the
people living there have adapted as best they can. For instance Long
Beach hosts an annual Razor Clam Festival that featured, what was at
the time, [The World's Large Frying
Pan](https://www.visitlongbeachpeninsula.com/giant-frying-pan/):

![World's Largest Frying Pan](/images/giant_pan.jpg)

South of the Columbia, in Oregon, [Tillamook invested in dairy
products](https://www.tillamook.com/).
[Astoria](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Astoria,_Oregon) remakes
itself every decade or so: logging, fishing, canning, brewing,
shipping, filming and recently tourism. On the Washington side,
there's a wildlife refuge, oyster beds, a kite museum and cranberry
bogs.

Nusfjord is a game about generations of families making a living in
the unforgiving environment of a remote fishing village. I'd've called
it Astoria or maybe [Ilwako](https://ilwaco-wa.gov/about-us/). If
you've never explored such a place, you'd be forgiven for finding the
theme a bit dull. The game is more than brightly colored buildings and
grumpy old men, however.

When you first sit down with the rules, it feels like a typical Eurogame:

* worker placement,
* resource conversion and
* engine building.


But there are a couple additions that break the mold:
* company shares and
* feeding elders from a shared banquet table.

At this point I should admit I've yet to play Nusfjord with other
players. I believe these mechanisms generate interesting player
interactions, but I haven't experienced them myself. Still, these
player interaction mechanisms enrich the solitaire game too. 

Everyone starts with 5 shares. 3 are unissued and cost a victory point
each at the end of the game if you still have them. The other 2 are
issued and worth a VP each. One action space is "Issue a Share" which
allows you to gain 2 gold in exchange for one of your unissued
shares. Gold is a fairly restricted resource, especially in the
beginning of the game. However, each turn you must pay a dividend to
whoever is holding your shares. Initially that means a fish goes into
the general supply during your fishing phase. Later it could mean you
are paying someone else one fish a turn per issued share.

It's slightly more complicated than that, thanks to the way fish are
distributed in the fishing phase. Elders get paid first, then outside
shareholders, then you get a fish per issued share in your possession,
then you add to your reserve and finally the general supply, if your
reserve is full. Setting aside the elders for a moment, the result is
you only get 2 fish in your supply per turn unless you buy more shares
or transfer fish from your reserve (with the "Transfer Reserve"
action).

Another action is "Take an Elder". Each elder represents a powerful
action space only you can use. But in order to use an elder, you must
feed him a fish from the banquet table, which is a shared resource. If
you use the last fish, nobody can use an elder until someone servers
more fish with the "Serve Fish" action. So you might think it's an
advantage to take the fish from the last plate on the banquet table.

The catch is that each plate served grants the server a gold coin. The
first plate costs but one fish. The second costs 2, the third and
fourth 3, the fifth and sixth 4, and the seventh 5 fish. Secretly,
therefore, the banquet table is really a fish market with supply and
demand. If there are no fish to serve, the market buys 1 fish for 1
gold. As the table fills, the price decreases. Eventually, you reach a
limit and can't sell fish at all.

There are a few more quirks such as a third of the fish you pay elders
eventually come into your supply. Though it feels strange (or even
pointless) on first play, these mechanisms add up to a functional
economy. Critically, the theme hides what's going on. We're still in a
fishing village, so it's "elders" and not "experts". It's a "banquet
table" and not a "fish market". Yes it's a business, but it's also a
way of life that must be preserved.

---

All of this (plus the forest and ship mechanisms) create a platform
for the stars of the game: building cards. The base game comes with 3
decks, 2 more come as
[expansions](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/234277/nusfjord/expansions)
and [2 additional expansions are coming
soon](https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2993522/nusfjord-big-box-two-expansions-expansions-reprint). Each
deck contains 45 unique buildings that can be placed on your personal
board. Each player board has room for 11 buildings, at most.[^1] As
the game progresses, each player is building a unique town.

Some cards are simple: build a Fish Stand and get 4 fish. Others give
ongoing advantages: a Pier House gives 3 wood each time you build a
ship. That card can be especially useful as ships are made of wood and
the building can supply it. The deck is divided into A, B and C
cards. A cards can usually be built in the first turn. B cards come
into play in the midgame. And C cards are only revealed in turn 4
of 7. Those cards offer the largest victory point gains.

Buildings give your company a character. No visually&mdash;they are
all a rather drab sort of tan. I'm talking more about the character of
how your town adapted to the changing economy. For example, here's a
game in which I sold my fleet and focused on finance. Sorta like
[Iceland in the early
2000s](https://archive.vanityfair.com/article/2009/4/wall-street-on-the-tundra).

![40 point solo game that features a bank center](/images/nusfjord_bank.jpg)

Other cards might encourage reforestation or large fleets or using
more elders or building up a reserve. Buildings change the basic rules
to give their owners advantages that nobody else will enjoy. Even
onetime bonuses (like gaining 4 fish) gives the player who claims
them a leg up because resources don't come easily.

When playing the solo game, all the A and B cards that can be played
are in the opening display. I spend several minutes planning my
strategy. It's entirely possible to plan out exactly what you are
going to do for the first three turns because there are no surprises
until the C cards come out. It's all about finding the best
combinations to build a thriving economy.

However the puzzle isn't so easily solved. While there aren't
opponents to block you, you can block yourself. In the basic solo
mode, you alternate between two colors of worker. Nothing is blocked
in turn one, but those workers don't return home and block those
spaces on turn 2. The advanced variant uses _three_ colors.[^2] The
idea is to simulate other players occupying spaces.

Timing of actions presents a greater challenge. It's common to find
yourself a few resources shy of an action and need to do things in a
different order. If you want to build a building that costs gold, you
need to first take an action that gives gold, such as issuing a
share. But if one of the buildings has an action tied to issuing
shares, you'll want to build that first in order to maximize the
benefit.

Something must give. It can be a quite satisfying puzzle even when the
solution is compromised. Often you'll need to forgo one benefit in
order to gain an advantage elsewhere. So much depends on the three
simple resources: fish, wood and gold. Being one short is common, but
there's often a surprising way to turn up a resource. [In one
game](https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2813085/taste-salmon-tide-me-over-possible-reprint),
I was delighted to discover that the humble "+1 Gold" solved a tricky
problem I'd backed myself into.

Starting on turn #4, it's time to see how well your strategy deals
with change. Four C cards appear with four new strategies your town
might take. Three more will come in turn #6.[^3] Some of those cards won't
be viable for your town, but odds are good that a few of the C cards
will fit in nicely. If you've managed to build an efficient economy
with your A and B cards, you'll have the resources to build the most
suitable C cards.

Other than the dull card illustrations (it's mostly text), the most
common complaint about Nusfjord is the C-card reveal. The argument, as
I understand it, is that people don't like building an economy one way
only to discover it doesn't work with the C cards they turn up halfway
through the game. I grant there could be a balance concern if one
person gets just the cards they need and other players
don't. Frequently [the solution
suggested](https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2999824/request-official-variant-c-buildings-upcoming-big)
is to deal C cards from the start of the game so that players can know
what to build for.

This complaint _fundamentally_ misunderstands Nusfjord. C cards
represent a sea change your village must respond to. The old ways
aren't working in the face of a modernizing world. Previewing them
early breaks the theme and the fundamental strategy of the first
half. There are plenty of games where you can pursue the same strategy
from the beginning and Nusfjord is not one of those games.

Having played many solo games, there's always something for me in the
first 4 C cards. I won't be able to build any for a turn or two, of
course, but there will be some possibilities. By turn 6, when the
final 3 C cards turn up, I'm planning for the end game. Sometimes
those plans don't change&mdash;I had the right cards already. But
sometimes I pivot a second time as the new options work better with my
current economy.

I suspect if you go into Nusfjord thinking it's essentially themeless,
that it's economic system is oversimplified and that it's not in the
same class as the epic A Feast for Odin, you'll feel the mid-game
reveal is flawed. Better to give players a clearer path to
victory. But if you take the time to explore the economic system and
don't compare it to other Uwe Rosenberg games, you might find it tells
a story that's authentic to many small towns in the age of
urbanization. 

---

None of this is to say Nusfjord is some sort of "message game". It's
an economic puzzle that offers huge variation. Solo players have the
option to play the Nusfjord campaign which consists of three games
using one deck. The first two times you play with half the deck each
game. For the third through, you can use the cards you _didn't_ build
in the first two games. It's a tour of the deck that fills an evening
if you take your time. 

My first campaign used the Herring deck. I'd only played once or twice
so I didn't know the decks very well. (In fact, I was still setting up
wrong and using 6 forest tiles instead of 4.) I dealt out the
Lighthouse, which is a B card that automatically triggers a "Transfer
Reserve" action when the Reserve is full of fish. It's an incredibly
useful card even if it only triggers once or twice. Reading about it
in the Appendix, I learned that it also can trigger the Dairy and Wet
Storage from the same deck. I didn't have those cards, so I decided to
save the Lighthouse for the third game.

When I got the other two cards that combo with the Lighthouse in the
second game, I avoided building them too. So in my final game, I
focused on a Transfer Reserve strategy. Finally I could use this
combo:

1. Fill my reserve in the fishing stage.
2. Trigger Lighthouse's Transfer Reserve action.
3. Trigger Wet Storage's bonus 3 wood in the newly empty Reserve.
4. Trigger Dairy's bonus gold in the Reserve.

It was the perfect cap to the evening and I got my personal best
score. And yet . . . I think I enjoyed the other two games more. In
theory Nusfjord's solo is all about chasing a high score. But I find
it best when I'm trying to solve the puzzle each tableau of cards
presents. Lighthouse's chaining action effect got me a high score, but
it wasn't a very complicated puzzle. 

Better to have a final turn where you want to do 4 things with your 3
remaining actions. Staring at the board you start comparing other
options. As you reject one idea after another because you are an
action or a resource short, you might stumble on a plan that clicks
together as if the game was designed for this solution. It wasn't, of
course. But I do think it was designed specifically for me.

---

[^1]: Well, there is one card that can be played in the ship area,
    which could allow 12 buildings.

[^2]: You also get to use the side of the Imitation board that gives
    you 3 "Copy an Action" spaces rather than just 1. Personally I
    find the Advanced variant no more challenging than the basic
    variant.

[^3]: This simulates the C card that other players haven't built in a
    multiplayer game.

<!--  LocalWords:  Nusfjord Nusfjord's
 -->
