---
layout: post
title:  "Battle Card: Market Garden"
subtitle: A beautifully simple model of a SNAFU
tags: game review
comments: true
---

There is [no shortage of games about Operation Market
Garden](https://boardgamegeek.com/geeksearch.php?action=search&objecttype=boardgame&q=market%20garden). If
you have [read](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Bridge_Too_Far_(book))
or [seen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Bridge_Too_Far_(film)) _A
Bridge Too Far_, you have a good idea why. It was an audacious and
dramatic attempt to shorten WWII by a year.

[Battle Card: Market
Garden](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/377068/battle-card-market-garden)
takes that complex military operation and abstracts it down to the key
turning points. The German defenders occupy each of the 4 control
areas. Allied paratroopers drop into the Netherlands and 30 Corps
gears up in Belgium. Combat is resolved using a simple Combat Results
Table (CRT) which inflicts causalities and flips control markers based
on the size of each force, who is attacking and a die roll. German
reinforcements arrive on regular schedule and Polish paratroopers wait
for the fog to clear so they can join the battle. It looks a lot like
a traditional, if small, war game. Perhaps something in the way of
[The Drive on
Metz](https://www.strategypage.com/wargames-handbook/chapter/4-3-metz.aspx).

![An allied victory.](/images/market_garden.jpg)

As you look more closely, however, the abstractions feel a lot closer
to a euro game. The units are dice, not chits. Instead of hexes,
there's a single path through the four regions. Combat happens in
every area with both Allied and German units whether you like it or
not. The only decision is attack or defend. The CRT requires only
comparing force sizes&mdash;there aren't any modifiers to apply. And,
of course, this is strictly a solo game.

The rules consume half a sheet of paper and the map takes the other
half. (This is a free print-and-play game.) It really takes 5 minutes
or so to complete and can be won with as few as 12 die rolls. After
the first game or two, you won't even need to reference the rules
other than the CRT. 

I regret to inform you, however, that Battle Card: Market Garden isn't
much of a game. There are plenty of decisions, but almost all of them
are forced. While it's certainly possible to play poorly, the
difference between winning and losing comes down to luck more than
anything else. 

Historical war games frequently exhibit a tension between accurately
modeling their subject and providing a balanced competition. Usually
designers solve this by giving players freedom to make different
decisions than their historical counterparts. For instance, if the
82<sup>nd</sup> Airborne secured the Nijmegen bridge immediately
rather than capturing the Groesbeek Heights, that might have shifted
the battle toward the Allied side. In this way war games return to
their roots as tools for planning.

The Battle Card system (assuming there will be more entries in the
series) abstracts most of those decisions away. Landing is risky and
mostly out of the control of the commander. So it's simulated by a
roll of a die for each unit. Fog lifting to allow Polish
reinforcements is another random die roll. German forces reinforce on
a strict schedule.

The only decisions remaining are:

1. Attack or defend with each airborne unit and
2. Whether to advance an airborne unit or 30 Corps.
   
Those decisions are further restricted by the mission goals. The
101<sup>st</sup> Airborne _must attack_ on day 1 so that 30 Corps can
advance into Eindhoven. 1<sup>st</sup> Airborne _should attack_ in
order to control Arnhem and prevent the German forces in the Nijmegen
region from getting reinforcements. The only question on the first day
is whether the 82<sup>nd</sup> should defend or attack to gain control
of Grave early.

As the situation develops, the decision of which unit to advance down
Hell's Highway tends to be obvious as well. Almost always it should be
30 Corps that advances if it can. Only if you think the
82<sup>nd</sup> needs to be brought to full strength by the
101<sup>st</sup> would it make sense to hold back the armor. There's
literally no room to maneuver, which is usually the best part of a war
game.

And yet . . . I really enjoy Battle Card: Market Garden. I won't deny
that my interest in the history of this particular battle plays a
large part in my fascination with the game. Incredibly this one small
package unfurls the drama of Market Garden as you play it again and
again. Maybe everything will go right and 30 Corps will be across the
Rhine before time runs out.

More commonly, you'll hit a SNAFU (Situation Normal&mdash;All F'ed
Up). One time, I had almost perfect landings, the 1<sup>st</sup>
captured Arnhem and all seemed to be set up for victory. And then the
101<sup>st</sup> failed to secure the Eindhoven area for two
consecutive days. Between German reinforcements and combat loses, the
Allied airborne divisions lost their numerical advantage and the
battle quickly ended.

Frequently 1<sup>st</sup> Airborne Division bravely fights to hold
Arnhem. Usually the Polish 1<sup>st</sup> Parachute Brigade provides
reinforcement in a dramatic fashion. But the armor just can't make it
past Nijmegen in time to save the day. The game is too high-level to
simulate details such as botched resupply, broken communications or
the Germans detonating bridges. Instead you read between the dice.

As I play one game after another, I wonder how
[Monty](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernard_Montgomery) and
[Ike](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dwight_D._Eisenhower) gamed out
the operation during planning. Taken as an abstract model, Battle
Card: Market Garden accurately demonstrates the peril of chaining
events that must go off as expected to achieve victory. Unless the
Allies can hold the bridge at Arnhem before the Germans can respond,
the whole endeavor fails.

We tend to assume complicated simulations get better as more details
are added. That can be true when the details can be modeled with
certainty. Weather models, for instance, [get better with tighter
grids](https://earthscience.stackexchange.com/questions/19/how-do-weather-models-work/56#56). But
battles swing on details that can't be anticipated: boats that arrive
too late for a planned river crossing or radios that don't work
because of sunspots. Modeling that sort of event creates false
precision. 

Better to build a simple model that's broadly correct and can be run
many times. Battle Card: Market Garden is just that sort of model and
it makes a marvelous tool for learning.

Also posted on [Board Game
Geek](https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/3012493/beautifully-simple-model-snafu).
