---
layout: post
title: 'Baseball Highlights 2045: 7-Card Promo Pack'
subtitle: Mixed bag
tags: game review
comments: true
---

Eagle-Gryphon sells a [7-card promo
pack](https://www.eaglegames.net/Baseball-Highlights-2045-7-Card-Promo-Pack-p/101869.htm)
for [Baseball Highlights:
2025](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/151022/baseball-highlights-2045). To
spoil my review, this is a purchase for completionists.

## Mordecai Marichal correction

![Original and corrected Mordecai Marichal](/images/bh_marichal.jpg)

First up is a correction of a misprinted card: Mordecai Marichal. I
recently got a copy of the Cyborg Pitchers Expansion. As mentioned in
the manual, it's missing the Pinch Hitter icon. You could use a
sharpie to add "PH" to the original card, but it's nice to have an
official copy.

CP-178 is highly situational. If you have 0 or 1 other Cyborgs, it's
not much use except for it's unexceptional revenue generation
value. Being able to Pinch Hit gives it an opportunity to become a
much more useful card. There's no reason to keep the old card in
circulation, if you have it. If you haven't acquired Cyborg Pitcher,
this card gives you a taste of the expansion. It would be more useful
if you had the extra cyborgs, however.

### Historical note

Mordecai Brown's nickname was "Three Finger", which sounds like the
backstory for a cyborg pitcher. He actually had ["4 and a half fingers
on his pitching
hand"](https://sabr.org/bioproj/person/Mordecai-Brown/) because a
childhood accident. His SABR bio also notes:

> Not long after, he fell while chasing a rabbit and broke his other
> fingers. The result was a bent middle finger, a paralyzed little
> finger, and a stump where the index finger used to be.

[Juan Marichal](https://sabr.org/bioproj/person/juan-marichal/) is
probably best known for his part in the Giants-Dodgers rivalry. He was
the Giants' ace to the Dodgers' Sandy Koufax. The two players were
also involved in [one of the ugliest brawls in baseball
history](https://www.baseball-almanac.com/box-scores/boxscore.php?boxid=196508220SFN). That
said, his legacy seems to be that of a supremely excellent natural
talent.

## Wiffle's Revenge and foil Wiffle's Revenge 

![Wiffle, Wiffle's Revenge and foil Wiffle's Revenge](/images/bh_wiffle.jpg)

Wiffle is a robot that hits singles. If you need singles, there's no
better choice. If you don't need singles, it has nothing, literally
nothing, to offer. Knuckleballs reduce all hits by one base. Singles
are wiped out by knuckleballs, so that action utterly negates Wiffle.

Wiffle's Revenge nullifies the Knuckleball and adds +1 Revenue if
someone plays Knuckleball against it. This card also changes Wiffle's
number from 32 to 42[^1] and re-frames its portrait to show more
detail. Like the new Mordecai Marichal card, this is a straight
upgrade in abilities. The upgrade is also unlikely to ever matter. In
the rare case that Wiffle's Revenge and a Knuckleball card are in the
same game, it's advantageous to play the Knuckleball early to avoid
triggering Wiffle's Revenge with your final card.

Foil cards are cool, I guess. They don't have any game play value, but
do look nice on display. YMMV.

### Historical note

Wiffle Bot is something of a mascot for Baseball Highlights: 2025:

> Go Wiffle Bot!

It's just about a perfect summation of the aesthetic of the game. The
weather vane sells the idea that these are steam-era machines cobbled
together to perform a specific (and somewhat bizarre) purpose. 

## Kris Correa and foil Kris Correa

![Kris Correa and foil Kris Correa](/images/bh_correa.jpg)

Baseball Highlights captures the complicated relationship baseball has
with star players. While top players cost teams substantially more
than other players, they can't dominate every game. Kris Correa costs
12, which will certainly be the only purchase in a buying round _if_
you can afford him at all. With a double, home run, stolen base _and_
a glove, this card tilts any game it's played in.

But he can't play in _every_ game. For a cost of 12, you can buy two
or maybe even three free agents. So this card is perfect for the end
of the season/series to push you over the top. Still a strong card,
but maybe not as strong as getting two mid-range cards if you have
several games left to go.

### Historical note

[Kris
Bryant](https://www.baseball-reference.com/players/b/bryankr01.shtml)
won the National League Rookie of the Year award in 2015. [Carlos
Correa](https://www.baseball-reference.com/players/c/correca01.shtml)
won the American League Rookie of the Year award in 2015. [Baseball
Highlights:
2045](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/151022/baseball-highlights-2045)
was released in 2015.

Kris Bryant signed a 7-year contract with the Colorado
Rockies 2022. Carlos Correa signed a 13-year contract with the Giants,
but failed his physical. Then he signed a 12-year contract with the
Mets and failed the physical. Finally, he then signed a 6-year
contract with the Twins, who he played for in 2022. Baseball
Highlights: 2045 is set 22 years in the future, so neither player will
be under contract unless they get the [Bobby Bonilla
deal](https://www.espn.com/mlb/story/_/id/34168816/what-bobby-bonilla-day-explaining-why-former-met-gets-paid-119m-every-july-1). He
will be paid through 2035 even though he hasn't played in a big league
game since 2001.

## Travel Stadium cards

![Travel Stadium cards compared to full-size](/images/bh_stadium.jpg)

These cards are a touch mysterious when you see them in photos
online. There aren't any instructions in the package[^2]
either. Instead of the regular Baseball Highlights card back, these
are double sided. One side has the "Home" pennant and the other has
"Visitor". If you have some small markers (I used 1cm colored cubes)
you can track the score. games won and base runners for each
player. That way you can pack the game for travel. It is possible to
use the base runner markers from the game, but chits from the [Spring
Training starter
game](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/224678/baseball-highlights-2045-spring-training)
are too big. Looking at photos online, the wooden pawns from the base
game would be uncomfortably large too. 8mm cubes (or dice) are ideal.

Unlike the full stadiums, there are no designated spots for the
lineup, dugout, on deck circle, in play or minor leagues. But you can
make your own conventions and keep the piles sorted. For me, on deck
is tucked under the bottom, minor league is turned sideways on one
side, the lineup and dugout are on the other side and the in play pile
is on top of the stadium. You do need to be a bit more careful than
normal to avoid bumping markers on these cards since there's very
little space.

### Historical note

Last year I bought a [Quiver card
case](https://quivertime.com/card-cases/quiver-card-case/). It's
allowed me to bring all sorts of card-based games with me when I
travel. After getting these stadium cards, I packed my Baseball
Highlights cards on a recent business trip. In the evenings I relaxed
with a few solitaire games and having nicely printed stadium cards
made the experience so much more relaxing.

## Summary

By my accounting 3 of these cards (the two foils and Wiffle's Revenge)
add nothing to my enjoyment of Baseball Highlights. The corrected
Mordecai Marichal fixes an obvious balance issue. Kris Correa is a
high-cost, high-impact card that can swing a game. The stadium cards
are a wonderful addition if you plan to pack up the game and take it
on a trip.

If you are a bigger fan of foil cards or Wiffle Bot, I could see this
being a home run. For me, it's a soft hit that drops in front of an
outfielder. 

---

[^1]: Meaning of life joke?

[^2]: It was a card-sized manilla envelope with the 7 cards tucked inside.
