---
layout: post
title: Community managers are conflicted advocates
subtitle: Stack Overflow lost a good one in Catija
comments: yes
tags: community 
---

There's an art to reading company announcements. Take [this one from
Stack
Overflow](https://stackoverflow.blog/2023/10/16/stack-overflow-company-announcement-october-2023/). Underneath
all the puffery, the message is simple:

1. [Business is terrible](/2023/05/17/so_business.html).
2. Tacking on "AI" [didn't help](/2023/06/26/problem_ai.html).
3. In order to avoid taking even bigger loses, the company is cutting
   expenses by laying off [good
   people](https://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/393797/three-cheers-for-cat).

One of the "approximately 28%" laid off today was
[Catija](https://meta.stackexchange.com/users/284336/catija). I was
one of the interviewers when she was hired and one of my interview
questions was something along the lines of:

> Describe your favorite feature on our sites.

I literally didn't care about the answer[^1] but I wanted to know if
the person I was interviewing understood how the site operates. It
also sparked conversations such as [how downvotes encourage
empathy](/2015/05/18/downvotes.html) or whether [a question
sandbox](/2019/06/22/disneyland.html) would reduce the need to close
questions.

But all of that was a prelude to my _real question_:

> What would happen if that feature needed to be removed? What
> problems would that cause?

When I interviewed Catija, her favorite feature was voting,[^2] so I
asked what would happen if _downvoting were removed_. My focus was on
this angle because whenever someone came to the company without
previous Stack Exchange experience, they'd have questions why we allow
downvotes. One of these days someone will finally get their way and
eliminate downvotes. When that time come, they will want someone like
Catija on the team.

I didn't ask this question to be a jerk, but because being a community
management means advocating for the company. It's a tiny bit like
being a defense attorney where you gotta fight for the best outcome
for your client whether or not they are guilty. Companies make dumb
decisions sometimes and a community manager might be called on to
communicate their decisions. A _good_ community manager finds the
best way to deliver bad news. An _exceptional_ community manager
pushes back so that the company can achieve its goals without
destroying the trust of the community.

Catija's answers to my interview questions showed she had the capacity
to be exceptional at the role. Her performance on the job demonstrated
her growing excellence as a community manager. Her last project for
Stack Exchange Inc. is still featured on Meta Stack Exchange:

![Featured
If more users could vote, would they engage more? Testing 1 reputation voting...
What should be next for community events?
Practical effects of the October 2023 layoff|](/images/catija_cb.png)

She wasn't advocating for the removal of downvotes, but for [removing
the reputation requirement for
voting](https://meta.stackexchange.com/questions/393127/if-more-users-could-vote-would-they-engage-more-testing-1-reputation-voting-on). It's
a radical idea. The moderators heard about it before [the decision
that ignited the moderator strike](/2023/05/31/mod_strike.html) so
they started waiting for it to be announced too. On [Meta Discord
server](https://meta.stackoverflow.com/questions/411426/is-there-a-stack-overflow-discord-server)
this potential change was labeled "the second shoe". So you can
imagine how unpopular the idea was going to be. Catija pushed back and
advocated for a slower experiment designed to test the concept without
breaking a bunch of communities all at once. It's [worth
trying](/2023/09/29/if-more-users-could-vote-would-they-engage-more.html),
though I wonder who will champion it now.

Companies routinely undervalue community management because they can't
properly value community trust. That's because executives never seem
to remember that people can just decide to leave. Or just as bad,
forget to come one day. It's like John Bull
([@garius](https://twitter.com/garius))
[wrote](https://threadreaderapp.com/thread/1588115310124539904.html):

> Users and readers will stick to what they know, and use, well beyond
> the point where they **start** to lose trust in it. And you won't
> see that. But they'll only **move** when they hit the Trust
> Thermocline. The point where their lack of trust in the product to
> meet their needs, and the emotional investment they'd made in it,
> have finally been outweighed by the physical and emotional effort
> required to abandon it.

For those of you who have forgotten their oceanography, the
thermocline is the depth where the sun's radiation can't reach to heat
the water. Temperature stays steady enough as you go deeper until it
falls rapidly in the thermocline:

[![Temperature according to ocean
depth](https://manoa.hawaii.edu/exploringourfluidearth/sites/default/files/Fig9.18-ThermoclineVerticalZone-01.png)](https://manoa.hawaii.edu/exploringourfluidearth/physical/ocean-depths/depth-zones)

By analogy, communities can lose trust for a while without any obvious
effect. But that doesn't mean there's no limit. So this is an awkward
situation where there's [no apparent downside to neglecting a
community](/2021/03/23/2021_CMX_report.html) until there _very much is
a downside_. People like Catija can detect problems far sooner than
anyone else and take action to build up trust before it's lost
forever. That's when the job shifts to advocating for the community
with the company.

Or maybe it's always a balance between the two going back and forth to
make sure each side has a better understanding of the other today than
they had yesterday. And meanwhile both community and company change
and grow and drift so there's never a fixed point. No fixed point
except for people who Catija who make it their mission to understand
the community. Stack Overflow doesn't know it yet, but they will miss
Catija in time.

---


[^1]: As long as it's not the ["thanks" reaction](/2020/07/02/react_thanks.html)!

[^2]: This and editing are the two most common answers I got. They are
    great features and I wasn't looking for novelty here. ;-)
