---
layout: post
title: 'Lord of the Rings: The Adventure Deck Game'
subtitle: 'How to enjoy an epic story in 10 minutes or less'
tags: game review
---

[Originally published on Board Game
Geek.](https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2849846)


I recently bought <a
href="https://www.asmodee-digital.com/en/lord-rings-adventure-card-game/">The
Lord of the Rings: Adventure Card Game - Definitive Edition</a>, which
is digital card game. I thought it was based on a physical game and
found <a
href="https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/102275/lord-rings-adventure-deck-game">Lord
of the Rings: The Adventure Deck Game</a>. But a quick look at the
rules convinced me this wasn't at all the same game.  Instead it's <a
href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Lord_of_the_Rings:_The_Card_Game">apparently</a>
a digital adaptation of <a
href="https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/77423/lord-rings-card-game">The
Lord of the Rings: The Card Game</a>. All very confusing, but to sum
up, this is a review of the solo-only, print-and-play, fan-designed
LoTR card game.

Only there are <a
href="https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2597665/best-version-game">three
different versions of this game</a>. I picked the <a
href="https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2594527/jackd-version" >JackD
version </a> because I liked the card design, it seemed to be a real
improvement over the original and it was easiest to print at home. You
can find a link to the card images on <a
href="https://www.jackdgames.com/free-games.html">JackD's
website</a>. I printed the six pages of card fronts on cardstock
making sure they were centered and 100% scale. Then I flipped the
pages over and printed the card backs the same way. Even though I used
US Letter rather than A4 paper, it all lined up. I cut the cards out
using a guillotine paper cutter and sleeved them. A paper trimmer
would probably work better, but the sleeves cover over imperfections
in the cutting (and the printing). The result looks quite
professional.


![I printed the JackD version and sleeved the cards. It looks great
except for the Frodo and Sam card that didn't print properly for some
reason.](/images/lotr_deck.jpg)

I had a harder time with the items and tracking cards. Samwise didn't
print on my Frodo and Sam card, for reasons I can't decipher. The item
cards are supposed to be the same on both sides, but I didn't see an
easy way to accomplish this. The Witch King tracker is too small for
my sleeves, so I glued the two sides together. Unfortunately, I'm bad
at gluing so the result is warped. I managed to print the rules
improperly so they don't fold into a booklet. None of this is
detrimental to the game, of course. The nice thing about
print-and-play is I can reprint the pieces later if it annoys me too
much.

Games based on popular cultural touchstones inherit a shortcut to
theme. Asmodee's Adventure Card Game serves as a ready example. Arwen
in the movies heals Frodo. (<a
href="https://scifi.stackexchange.com/questions/65600/what-did-arwen-mean-by-what-she-said-when-she-saved-frodo">Maybe?</a>)
So the game gives her reasonably impressive stats and the ability to
heal other characters. Slap some art and flavor text on the card and
ship it. We already have a context for Arwen, so there's no need to
flesh out the lore. Do the same for a few dozen other characters
(including obscure figures) and you've got a thematic game. Most
people won't think too hard if, say, Arwen, Éowyn and Gimli go on an
adventure together fighting spiders.

This game does something different. Yes, Arwen is in the game and she
does something she's known for in the movies: she causes the river
Bruinen to flood and wash the Ringwraiths far away from the One
Ring. Mechanically it sets the Witch King tracker to 0. And also yes,
the card features a photo of Liv Tyler as Arwen and appropriate flavor
text. The difference is she plays a single distinct role that works
thematically with the other mechanisms in the game. Sometimes she
doesn't have any impact on the story and sometimes she's a central
element, but she never threatens to break the tale by being out of
place.

To explain, the premise of the game is that you are playing as Frodo
and Sam trying to destroy the One Ring. If you take too long or lose
all your health or are overcome by the Witch King, you lose. Each turn
you must chose a direction to travel: left, right or forward. The
topmost card in the discard pile determines how many cards you draw
from the deck based on the direction of travel. When all the cards
have been drawn, the final card is Mordor which forces one final
obstacle before you can win the game (and save Middle Earth).

Like the source material, a tension of the journey hinges on how fast
the hobbits risk moving toward their goal. Each card has an Attack
Value from 0 to 3. Drawing one card is generally safe, since you start
with 10 health and heal every other turn (during the night
cycle). Drawing 5 cards is suicidal unless you happen to have a way to
mitigate the attacks. One option is to use the Ring. It makes you
invisible and invulnerable, but also draws the Witch King
closer. Using the Ring also puts you at risk of drawing Sauron's
attention and sending more Ringwraiths to your path.

The last card drawn becomes your destination. It might be location,
such as The Dead Marshes, or a character, such as Arwen. It's not
scripted to match the canonical story, but you still feel the same
dread or relief you felt the first time you read or watched the Lord
of the Rings. Arwen isn't an awesome elf fighter/healer who joins your
party. Instead she rescues Frodo from the Witch King and fades from
the story. This isn't her story. Frodo and Sam move on with only
guesses at the dangers and allies they will encounter next.

Each turn is marked as either day or night. At the end of a night
turn, you rest automatically (unless forbidden by a card
effect). Resting during the day costs another turn, but might be
necessary if Frodo is badly wounded. So there's a rhythm to the
play. Push forward during the day hoping for low attack cards followed
by caution at night to preserve a sliver of health before the rest
period. Or maybe caution during the day to give you more slack at
night in case things turn for the worst. Successful play requires
discerning when speed is of the essence versus caution. Resting during
the day or using an item could be the difference that allows your
quest to continue or it could slow it down enough to cause it to fail.

These decisions come quickly and the game ends after a few
minutes. There is, of course, a good deal of luck in the outcome, but
you are usually given the tools to overcome luck. Move slower if you
don't have the proper equipment. Use the One Ring late in the game to
speed past cards. Sam can sacrifice himself to save Frodo. Search back
in the discard for Aragorn to reduce the Witch King track. Use an
item, if you have one. Similar to a competent roguelike, winning
requires saving resources for just the right moment.

Perhaps the best comparison is to <a
href="https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/823/lord-rings" >The Lord of
the Rings</a>, the cooperative Reiner Knizia classic. It's
challenging, tense, thematic and clever. But this LoTR game is also
much quicker and simpler. Expect to lose several times before winning,
which isn't a problem since starting over is a matter of resetting
trackers and shuffling the deck. Each time you lose, you'll learn more
of the secrets of the game. When you do win, you will, if my
experience is any indication, want to shuffle the deck and try again.
