---
layout: post
title: Codenames
subtitle: No secret to this success
tags: game review
---

With such a simple concept, it's hard to believe Codenames isn't a
refined version of an older parlor game.[^1] Each team selects a
spymaster who knows the codename of each team's agents as they are
laid out in a grid on the table. Then the spymasters take turns
sending a single word clue and how many cards their team should
guess. The first team to have all of their target agents revealed
(without guessing the assassin) wins the round. Frequently teams
select another spymaster and play again.

Great party games don't need the safety net of scoring. I vaguely
remember Codenames having a score system. When I checked [the
rules](https://czechgames.com/files/rules/codenames-rules-en.pdf) I
discovered there is&mdash;for the two-player variant. I suppose
competitive people would just keep track of how many times their team
won. Keeping track of winners and losers just doesn't add a whole lot.

Not that Codenames isn't challenging. It's more that the challenge
comes from mastering the puzzle each array of words presents. Here's
an example lineup from the [Codenames online
implementation](https://codenames.game/):

![Red has "space" and "satellite", but blue has "Venus".](/images/codenames.png)

This is what the spymasters of each team will see:
* Red and blue cards are the red and blue agents
  respectively. Spymasters only want their team to guess their own
  color and avoid signaling the opposite color, which helps the other
  team and ends the turn.
* Tan cards are civilians. If they are selected, they end the current
  team's turn. That's annoying, but recoverable. Teams can always make
  an extra guess and pick up an agent they hadn't taken in a previous
  turn.
* The black card is an assassin. Any team that picks that card
  immediately loses the game.

Their teammates only see the array of cards and not the key that
identifies them.

In this example, the red spymaster might notice "space" and
"satellite" as easily signaled words. "Rocket" could work as the clue
and might even pull in "engine" if you push your luck a bit and say it
applies to 3 instead of 2. But then there's "Venus" in blue, which
must be avoided. Or maybe your team will guess "mass" based on a
long-forgotten physics class. And there's always a chance someone will
try rope "carrot" in since it has a vaguely rocket shape and partially
rhymes.

Or maybe link "maracas" and "sound"? "Music" maybe? Only be careful
not to lead your team to try out "teacher" based on music being a
subject they might teach since that card is the assassin. Knowing your
team helps as a Mozart enthusiast might select "mass" as a musical
composition. On second thought, it's all too easy for someone to pick
"track", which wouldn't be terrible (just a civilian) but would both
end the turn and give the other team one fewer word to think about.

The card layout gives spymasters a puzzle and the spymasters pass a
new puzzle to their teams. But not just to their own team. If you see
"pox 2" and the opposing team guesses "disease" (correct) and "witch"
(a miss), you have a bit of useful information if you remember the
brief "monkey pox" scare. Again, it can help to know your audience.

Generally party games become unbalanced with couples or close friends
are on the same team. Codenames isn't an exception, though it does
lead to second guessing that can result in disaster. Recently I played
with my wife and gave the clue "Salt 3". My team narrowed it down to
these words:

* Himalayas
* Water
* Beach
* Compound

I hadn't connected "salt" to "compound", but my wife was right when
she said that's something I was prone to doing. So instead of "beach",
which was a reach, they picked "compound". It was the assassin. For
whatever reason my brain didn't make a connection it normally would,
so we lost. Codenames rewards cleverness and anticipating the thinking
of other people. But there's always a risk of over-thinking things
both as a spymaster and as a team member.

When each round starts, it can take a bit of time for the first
spymaster to pick their first clue. But after the clues start coming,
the game usually moves at a pleasing pace. Everyone is playing on the
same tableau of cards, so every move impacts everyone at the
table. Each card that gets revealed changes the landscape so that new
clues are opened up. While you can get a snack when it's not your
turn, you risk missing an important clue as the other team discuss
their options.

Now sometimes a spymaster takes too long coming up with a clue.[^2]
This is sometimes called Analysis Paralysis (AP) and can kill the
momentum of a game. Codenames includes a sand timer and very unusual
rule for deploying it. Most of the time it stays in the box, but
anyone can start the timer if they feel it's needed. The rules even
suggest a spymaster set the timer for themselves so that they have a
self-imposed deadline. I love this mechanism because:

1. It could easily be added to any game at all and
2. It paradoxically gives some players more time to think.

When the pressure is on and you have to make a decision, it can feel
like every second is an eternity. Setting a timer does limit your
time, but you don't have to worry you are taking too long. As long as
you beat the timer, you've kept to a socially-acceptable pace.

At it's heart, Codenames is a word-association game that's probably a
lot closer to Apples to Apples than I'd like to imagine. The spy novel
theme lifts it out of that comparison for me. Card art provides an
assist with suave red and blue agents, and confused neutrals. (As an
extra touch of class these cards have a male and a female side that
have no gameplay significance.) A mysterious assassin card even though
it's not needed: once the assassin is picked, the game is over. It's
always sitting on the table waiting for someone to make a fatal
miscalculation.

---

[^1]: I'm specifically thinking of
    [Balderdash](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/163/balderdash),
    which closely resembles
    [Dictionary](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/28553/fictionary). It's
    an excellent re-implementation.

[^2]: Or occationally a team takes too long finalizing their guesses,
    but this is less common.

<!--  LocalWords:  Codenames
 -->
