---
layout: post
title: "The Blood of an Englishman: Head to head fable simulator"
tags: game review
comments: true
---

If you sat down to design a game about Jack and the Beanstalk, it
seems inevitable that it'll be an asymmetric contest between quick and
nimble Jack (from an unrelated nursery rhyme) and the powerful and
ponderous giant. If it must be a tableau manipulation game as well
there's no doubt the end result will be something along the lines of
_The Blood of an Englishman_.

If you've played solitaire (including [more obscure
variations](https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/2976943/enders-review-solitaire-games-youve-never-heard-of)),
you've moved cards around in a tableau. Often the rules restrict you
to moving the cards in the front and your goal is to dig out the next
card in a sequence in order to build up stacks (foundations) next to
the tableau. This is what Jack does in _The Blood of an Englishman_,
though the numbers need not be sequential, just
increasing. Thematically, he's climbing the beanstalk (numbered cards
which have increasingly ominous images of vines) to get to a treasure
(gold, goose or harp). Claiming all three treasures would require 21
cards and Jack can make three moves a turn. Add in a few more moves
because he needs to move cards from front to front or back to front in
order to reveal the next bit of beanstalk or the next treasure.

This would be the most boring game of solitaire if there weren't a
giant eager to squash Jack. The giant has [one
aim](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fee-fi-fo-fum):


> Fee-fi-fo-fum,  
> I smell the blood of an Englishman,  
> Be he alive, or be he dead  
> I'll have his bones to grind my bread.  

Mixed among the vines and the treasure are eight cards with an
increasingly threatening giant. There are two cards each labeled Fe,
Fi, Fo and Fum. If these four words ever appear (in any order) at the
front of the 5-column tableau or grouped together in a single column,
the giant has obtained Jack's bones. For obvious reasons, that ends
Jack's game poorly. Fortunately (for Jack) the giant has one move per
Jack's three. Unfortunately, that move can be calamitous.

Like the colossus he is, the giant may move four (and exactly four)
cards from the front of one stack to the front of another. That can
reveal a giant card that seemed safely buried in the stack. Or he can
move two cards front to front. This counts as a single move (for the
giant) which can waste Jack's time by covering a treasure or a key
number. Finally the giant may discard a single vine anywhere in the
tableau, which has an obvious use of limiting Jack's options as he
climbs his beanstalk. It also has a subtle use when the vine card
separates two giant cards.

Since every card is visible from the start, this is a perfect
information game similar to [chess](/2021/01/03/chess-review.html),
[tablut](/2022/05/05/tablut_review.html) or the master variant of
[Torres](/2023/10/02/torres.html). Every now and then the cards turn
up in such a way as to give the giant an easy victory. So Jack gets a
chance, before the game begins, to move a single card from any place
in the tableau to another spot. Thematically this is justified as the
help of the giantess from the story. It's such a lovely concept and
almost too perfect.

From what I've read, people tend to find Jack the easier role. That
certainly holds at the start of the game since Jack's extra moves help
him climb beanstalk stacks with little opposition from the giant. He
can claim one or even two treasures while the giant maneuvers his
cards into place. But each time he takes away a vine card, there are
fewer options to hide from the giant cards. So the tension builds and
Jack slows down. His moves must be deliberate and constantly watchful
for the giant's tricks.

I can't be sure, of course, but I believe a patient giant can always
defeat Jack. The large moves must be focused on concentrating giant
cards almost to the excussion of thwarting Jack's goal. Yes you'll
lose some gold and a magical golden-egg-producing goose. But there's
always that harp destined to betray Jack. (To be clear, the treasures
have no magical powers in the game.) Now Jack's path to victory is
constrained and the giant's moves can be subtle. No need to bury the
next number if you can discard it instead and add more moves to Jack's
progress. Setting up the threat of Fee and Fi in one that can be
joined to Fo and Fum in another with an epic four-card move can slow
Jack down long enough for the giant to pull off a Fee, Fi, Fo, Fum in
another column with discards or single-card moves. And I'm not
convinced Jack can beat a giant who's patient enough to get Jack on
his third beanstalk.

Jack's story has been told for hundreds of years, which means it's a
solid story. But it's also been pretty well explored. By the time
[Disney got a hold of it in
1933](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giantland), it was a brisk 8
minute vehicle for Disney animators to create the Tom and Jerry model
with Mickey and the Giant. Mickey Mouse himself frames the action by
reading the storybook version to mice children who don't care for it
in end. It's a story that requires embellishment that's not so easy to
pull off as live-action adaptations have shown.

For better or worse, The Blood of an Englishman follows the canonic
story as faithfully as one could imagine from a simple card game. I'd
be tempted to suggest "improvements" such as giving Jack special
powers when he collects a treasure. But that would break the
compelling elegance of the existing rules. Unfortunately those rules
aren't as sublime as [Lost Cities](/2021/12/07/lost_cities.html), so
it's not the two-player game I'm likely to reach for. Thankfully, _The
Blood of an Englishman_ doesn't take much longer to set up and play
than a Disney short. You'll want to play a second time with swapped
roles. But after that the game goes back on the shelf waiting for
someone looking through to spot that exceptionally evocative cover and
ask "What's this game like?"

Also published on [Board Game Geek](https://boardgamegeek.com/thread/3476041/article/45782013#45782013).
